---
title: The Divine Conspiracy
author: Dallas Willard
source_url: https://www.notion.so/25da89fba4fb42cbb08bd9525ba97f63
date_added: 2026-05-30
date_published: unknown
type: Article
tags: ["topic-vault", "readwise-vault"]
referenced_by_topics: ["spiritual formation"]
---

Here is the result of "view" for the Page with URL https://www.notion.so/25da89fba4fb42cbb08bd9525ba97f63 as of 2025-03-11T21:29:33.485Z:
<page url="https://www.notion.so/25da89fba4fb42cbb08bd9525ba97f63" icon="https://is4-ssl.mzstatic.com/image/thumb/Publication/21/82/67/mzi.jfemmjml.jpg/545x750w.jpg">
<ancestor-path>
<parent-data-source url="collection://5b54c90e-5328-4c1a-8679-469de2932b1b" name="Library"/>
<ancestor-2-database url="https://www.notion.so/13ad939f560c414b825d45ac8c2a2118" title=""/>
<ancestor-3-page url="https://www.notion.so/92bfa9ac85f3481ab886518cb4f96498" title="readwise"/>
<ancestor-4-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580cab9f0c5a37ff8f1c6" title=""/>
<ancestor-5-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580809ca5cafcb22c1274" title=""/>
<ancestor-6-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb55809c8e5fd66f56d28031" title="Hunter Wilson"/>
</ancestor-path>
<properties>
{"Author":"Dallas Willard","Category":"Books","Document Notes":"","Full Title":"The Divine Conspiracy","Highlights":152,"Summary":"","Title":"The Divine Conspiracy","date:Last Highlighted:is_datetime":0,"date:Last Highlighted:start":"2022-12-22","date:Last Synced:is_datetime":0,"date:Last Synced:start":"2025-03-11","topic vault":["https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb5580c6b2f6f171630c4113"],"url":"https://www.notion.so/25da89fba4fb42cbb08bd9525ba97f63","userDefined:URL":""}
</properties>
<content>
<details>
<summary>**Table of Contents**</summary>
	<table_of_contents/>
</details>
You must have often wondered why the enemy \[God\] does not make more use of his power to be sensibly present to human souls in any degree he chooses and at any moment. But you now see that the irresistible and the indisputable are the two weapons which the very nature of his scheme forbids him to use. Merely to over-ride a human will (as his felt presence in any but the faintest and most mitigated degree would certainly do) would be for him useless. He cannot ravish. He can only woo. For his ignoble idea is to eat the cake and have it; the creatures are to be one with him, but yet themselves; merely to cancel them, or assimilate them, will not serve…. Sooner or later he withdraws, if not in fact, at least from their conscious experience, all supports and incentives. He leaves the creature to stand up on its own legs—to carry out from the will alone duties which have lost all relish…. He cannot “tempt” to virtue as we do to vice. He wants them to learn to walk and must therefore take away his hand…. Our cause is never more in danger than when a human, no longer desiring, but still intending, to do our enemy’s will, looks round upon a universe from which every trace of him seems to have vanished, and asks why he has been forsaken, and still obeys.<br><br>UNCLE SCREWTAPE C. S. LEWIS, THE SCREWTAPE LETTERS
<empty-block/>
My hope is to gain a fresh hearing for Jesus, especially among those who believe they already understand him. In his case, quite frankly, presumed familiarity has led to unfamiliarity, unfamiliarity has led to contempt, and contempt has led to profound ignorance.
<empty-block/>
Very few people today find Jesus interesting as a person or of vital relevance to the course of their actual lives. He is not generally regarded as a real-life personality who deals with real-life issues but is thought to be concerned with some feathery realm other than the one we must deal with, and must deal with now. And frankly, he is not taken to be a person of much ability.
<empty-block/>
He is automatically seen as a more or less magical figure—a pawn, or possibly a knight or a bishop, in some religious game—who fits only within the categories of dogma and of law. Dogma is what you have to believe, whether you believe it or not. And law is what you must do, whether it is good for you or not. What we have to believe or do now, by contrast, is real life, bursting with interesting, frightening and relevant things and people.
<empty-block/>
Now, in fact, Jesus and his words have never belonged to the categories of dogma or law, and to read them as if they did is simply to miss them. They are essentially subversive of established arrangements and ways of thinking. That is clear from the way they first entered the world, their initial effects, and how they are preserved in the New Testament writings and live on in his people. He himself described his words as “spirit and life” (John 6:63). They invade our “real” world with a reality even more real than it is, which explains why human beings then and now have to protect themselves against them.
<empty-block/>
The life and words that Jesus brought into the world came in the form of information and reality. He and his early associates overwhelmed the ancient world because they brought into it a stream of life at its deepest, along with the best information possible on the most important matters. These were matters with which the human mind had already been seriously struggling for a millennium or more without much success. The early message was, accordingly, not experienced as something its hearers had to believe or do because otherwise something bad—something with no essential connection with real life—would happen to them. The people initially impacted by that message generally concluded that they would be fools to disregard it. That was the basis of their conversion.
<empty-block/>
Dogma and law—wrongly, perhaps, but understandably—have come to have about them an air of arbitrariness. Because of how our minds have come down to us through history, dogma and law for most people today simply mean what God has willed. This view makes them important, and also dangerous, and that is appropriately acknowledged. But it breaks any connection with our sense of how things really are: with truth and reality. And our “real life” is our truth and reality. It is where things actually happen, not a realm of supposed-to-bes that only threaten to make life harder, or possibly unbearable.
<empty-block/>
It is the failure to understand Jesus and his words as reality and vital information about life that explains why, today, we do not routinely teach those who profess allegiance to him how to do what he said was best. We lead them to profess allegiance to him, or we expect them to, and leave them there, devoting our remaining efforts to “attracting” them to this or that.
<empty-block/>
So one is bound to look for an explanation of this state of affairs. How could the obligation be so clear and at the same time there be no attempt to meet it? The problem, we may be sure, lies very deep within the ideas that automatically govern our thinking about who we are, as Christians and as human beings, and about the relevance of Jesus to our cosmos and our lives.
<empty-block/>
Jesus’ instructions on this matter are, after all, starkly clear. We just don’t do what he said. We don’t seriously attempt it. And apparently we don’t know how to do it. You have only to look honestly at our official activities to see this.
<empty-block/>
But it is a matter of extreme importance, and unless it is openly acknowledged, nothing can be done about it.
<empty-block/>
In fact, it lies much deeper than anything we might appropriately feel guilty about. For it is not, truly, a matter of anything we do or don’t do. It is a matter of how we cannot but think and act, given the context of our mental and spiritual formation. So any significant change can come only by breaking the stranglehold of the ideas and concepts that automatically shunt aside Jesus, “the Prince of Life,” when questions of concrete mastery of our life arise.
<empty-block/>
Whatever the ultimate explanation of it, the most telling thing about the contemporary Christian is that he or she simply has no compelling sense that understanding of and conformity with the clear teachings of Christ is of any vital importance to his or her life, and certainly not that it is in any way essential. We—including multitudes who have distanced themselves from any formal association with him—still manage to feel guilty with reference to those teachings, with a nervous laugh and a knowing look. But more often than not, I think, such obedience is regarded as just out of the question or impossible. This is largely because obedience is thought of solely in terms of law—which we shall have much to say about in what follows.
<empty-block/>
Individual Christians still hear Jesus say, “Whoever hears these words of mine and does them is like those intelligent people who build their houses upon rock,” standing firm against every pressure of life (Matt. 7:24–25). How life-giving it would be if their understanding of the gospel allowed them simply to reply, “I will do them! I will find out how. I will devote my life to it! This is the best life strategy I ever heard of!” and then go off to their fellowship and its teachers, and into their daily life, to learn how to live in his kingdom as Jesus indicated was best.
<empty-block/>
It is tempting in such a project to enter the conflict—long-standing and currently at the boiling point—about the accessibility of the “real” Jesus and his words to us now. Because I do not do so, I will simply state my assumptions about the Bible: On its human side, I assume that it was produced and preserved by competent human beings who were at least as intelligent and devout as we are today. I assume that they were quite capable of accurately interpreting their own experience and of objectively presenting what they heard and experienced in the language of their historical community, which we today can understand with due diligence.<br><br>On the divine side, I assume that God has been willing and competent to arrange for the Bible, including its record of Jesus, to emerge and be preserved in ways that will secure his purposes for it among human beings worldwide. Those who actually believe in God will be untroubled by this. I assume that he did not and would not leave his message to humankind in a form that can only be understood by a handful of late-twentieth-century professional scholars, who cannot even agree among themselves on the theories that they assume to determine what the message is.
<empty-block/>
The Bible is, after all, God’s gift to the world through his Church, not to the scholars.
<empty-block/>
It comes through the life of his people and nourishes that life. Its purpose is practical, not academic. An intelligent, careful, intensive but straightforward reading—that is, one not governed by obscure and faddish theories or by a mindless orthodoxy—is what it requires to direct us into life in God’s kingdom. Any other approach to the Bible, I believe, conflicts with the picture of the God that, all agree, emerges from Jesus and his tradition. To what extent this belief of mine is or is not harmfully circular, I leave the philosophically minded reader to ponder.
<empty-block/>
I complete a trilogy on the spiritual life of those who have become convinced that Jesus is the One. In the first, In Search of Guidance, I attempted to make real and clear the intimate quality of life with him as “a conversational relationship with God.”
<empty-block/>
But that relationship is not something that automatically happens, and we do not receive it by passive infusion. So the second book, The Spirit of the Disciplines, explains how disciples or students of Jesus can effectively interact with the grace and spirit of God to access fully the provisions and character intended for us in the gift of eternal life.
<empty-block/>
However, actual discipleship or apprenticeship to Jesus is, in our day, no longer thought of as in any way essential to faith in him. It is regarded as a costly option, a spiritual luxury, or possibly even an evasion. Why bother with discipleship, it is widely thought, or, for that matter, with a conversational relationship with God? Let us get on with what we have to do.
<empty-block/>
This third book, then, presents discipleship to Jesus as the very heart of the gospel. The really good news for humanity is that Jesus is now taking students in the master class of life.
<empty-block/>
The eternal life that begins with confidence in Jesus is a life in his present kingdom, now on earth and available to all. So the message of and about him is specifically a gospel for our life now, not just for dying. It is about living now as his apprentice in kingdom living, not just as a consumer of his merits. Our future, however far we look, is a natural extension of the faith by which we live now and the life in which we now participate. Eternity is now in flight and we with it, like it or not
<empty-block/>
### God’s care for humanity was so great that he sent his unique Son among us, so that those who count on him might not lead a futile and failing existence, but have the undying life of God Himself.<br><br>JOHN 3:1
<empty-block/>
God’s care for humanity was so great that he sent his unique Son among us, so that those who count on him might not lead a futile and failing existence, but have the undying life of God Himself.<br><br>JOHN 3:16
<empty-block/>
Jesus’ good news, then, was that the Kingdom of God had come, and that he, Jesus, was its herald and expounder to men. More than that, in some special, mysterious way, he was the Kingdom.<br><br>MALCOLM MUGGERIDGE, JESUS: THE MAN WHO LIVES
<empty-block/>
there now is no recognized moral knowledge upon which projects of fostering moral development could be based.
<empty-block/>
There is now not a single moral conclusion about behavior or character traits that a teacher could base a student’s grade on
<empty-block/>
Bok points out that in other days “the instructors aim was…to foster a belief in commonly accepted moral values”. Now all is changed: “Today’s course in applied ethics does not seek to convey a set of moral truths but tries to encourage the student to think carefully about complex moral issues.” One senses that the governing assumption of his discussion is that these two objectives are mutually exclusive.<br><br>“The principle aim of the course,” Bok continues, “is not to impart ‘right answers’ but to make the students more perceptive in detecting ethical problems when they arise, better acquainted with the best moral thought that has accumulated through the ages, and more equipped to reason about the ethical issues they will face”.
<empty-block/>
Of course, if a student seriously wrote on a test that 7 times 5 equals 32, or that Columbus discovered America in 1520, we would be permitted to “impose our views” in these cases. It would not matter by what route the student came to such conclusions because these cases concern matters that—quibbles aside—are regarded as known. That is what marks the difference.
<empty-block/>
Robert Coles, professor of psychiatry and medical humanities at Harvard and a well-known researcher and commentator on matters social and moral, published a piece in the Chronicle of Higher Education on “The Disparity Between Intellect and Character.”2 The piece is about “the task of connecting intellect to character.” This task, he adds, “is daunting.”
<empty-block/>
“the task of connecting intellect to character.” This task, he adds, “is daunting.”
<empty-block/>
“What’s the point of knowing good if you don’t keep trying to become a good person?”
<empty-block/>
There were no questions on his tests about these matters. He never deals with the fact that he could not use such questions because no one can now claim to know about such matters.
<empty-block/>
The problem here is less one of connecting character to intellect than one of connecting intellectual to moral and spiritual realities. The trouble is precisely that character is connected with the intellect. The trouble is what is and is not in the intellect.
<empty-block/>
You could never grade someone for holding Utilitarianism or Kantianism to be true or false. One can only know about such theories and principles, and think about them in more or less clever ways. You can brightly discuss them. For that the young man got his A’s. But that, of course, had no bearing on his character or behavior because it is only literary or historical or perhaps logical expertise, not moral knowledge.
<empty-block/>
What is the point of standing up for rights in a world where few stand up for their responsibilities? Your rights will do you little good unless others are responsible.
<empty-block/>
nd what is it, really, that explains the enduring relevance of Jesus to human life? Why has he mattered so much? Why does he matter now? Why does he appear on the front covers of leading newsmagazines two millennia later? Why, even, is his name invoked in cursing more than that of any other person who has lived on earth? Why do more people self-identify as Christians—by some estimates 33.6 percent of the world population—than any other world religion?9 How is it that multitudes today credit him with their life and well-being?<br><br>I think we finally have to say that Jesus’ enduring relevance is based on his historically proven ability to speak to, to heal and empower the individual human condition. He matters because of what he brought and what he still brings to ordinary human beings, living their ordinary lives and coping daily with their surroundings. He promises wholeness for their lives. In sharing our weakness he gives us strength and imparts through his companionship a life that has the quality of eternity.
<empty-block/>
In Matthew’s account of Jesus’ deeds and words, the formulation repeatedly used is the well-known “Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens is at hand” (3:2; 4:17; 10:7). This is a call for us to reconsider how we have been approaching our life, in light of the fact that we now, in the presence of Jesus, have the option of living within the surrounding movements of God’s eternal purposes, of taking our life into his life.
<empty-block/>
A Harlot Crashes the Party
<empty-block/>
A very “nice” man named Simon, a Pharisee, brought Jesus to dinner at his home in Capernaum (Luke 5). As they were reclining around the table, a woman known to be a harlot somehow came in, bringing with her an expensive flask of perfumed lotion. She certainly had overheard Jesus teaching and had seen his care for others. She was moved to believe that she too was loved by him and by the heavenly Father of whom he spoke. She was seized by a transforming conviction, an overwhelming faith.<br><br>Suddenly there she was, down on the floor by Jesus, tears of gratitude for him pouring down upon his feet. Drying them away with her hair, she then rained kisses upon his feet and massaged them with the lotion.<br><br>What a scene! That nice man, Simon, was taking it in, and—no doubt battling a surge of disapproval—he tried to put the best possible construction on it.<br><br>It just could not be that Jesus wasn’t nice. Clearly he was a righteous man. So the only reason he would be letting this woman touch him, or even come near him, was that he didn’t know she was a prostitute. And that, unfortunately, proved that Jesus didn’t have “it” after all. “If this fellow really were a prophet,” Simon mused, “he would know what this woman does, for she is filthy.” Perhaps Simon consoled himself with the thought that it is at least no sin not to be a prophet. It never occurred to him that Jesus would know exactly who the woman was and yet let her touch him.<br><br>But Jesus did know, and he also knew what Simon was thinking. So he told him a story of a man who lent money to two people: \$50,000 to one and \$5 to the other, let us say. When they could not repay, the man simply forgave the debts. “Now Simon,” Jesus asked, “which one will love the man most?” Simon replied that it would be the one who had owed most.<br><br>That granted, Jesus positioned Simon and the streetwalker side by side to compare their hearts:<br><br>“Look at this woman,” he said. “When I entered your home, you didn’t bother to offer me water to wash the dust from my feet, but she has washed them with her tears and wiped them with her hair. You refused me the customary kiss of greeting, but she has kissed my feet again and again from the time I first came in. You neglected the usual courtesy of olive oil to anoint my head, but she has covered my feet with rare perfume. Therefore her sins—and they are many—are forgiven, for she loved me much; but one who is forgiven little, shows little love.” (Luke 7:44–47 LB)
<empty-block/>
“Loved me much!” Simply that, and not the customary proprieties, was now the key of entry into the rule of God.
<empty-block/>
We must not overlook the connection between faith and love. The woman saw Jesus and recognized who he was and who dwelt in him. That vision was her faith. She knew he was forgiving and accepting her before he ever said, “Your sins are forgiven.” She knew because she had seen a goodness in him that could only be God, and it broke her heart with gratitude and love.
<empty-block/>
God’s Rule Extended Onward Through Us
<empty-block/>
From the very beginning of his work, those who relied on him had, at his touch, entered the rule, or governance, of God and were receiving its gracious sufficiency. Jesus was not just acting for God but also with God—a little like the way, in a crude metaphor, I act with my power steering, or it with me, when I turn the wheel of my car.<br><br>And this “governance” is projected onward through those who receive him. When we receive God’s gift of life by relying on Christ, we find that God comes to act with us as we rely on him in our actions. That explains why Jesus said that the least in the kingdom of the heavens are greater than John the Baptist—not, of course, greater in themselves, but as a greater power works along with them. The “greater” is not inherent, a matter of our own substance, but relational.
<empty-block/>
“Those who have seen me have seen the Father.”
<empty-block/>
Frank Laubach wrote of how, in his personal experiment of moment-by-moment submission to the will of God, the fine texture of his work and life experience was transformed. In January of 1930 he began to cultivate the habit of turning his mind to Christ for one second out of every minute.16<br><br>After only four weeks he reported, “I feel simply carried along each hour, doing my part in a plan which is far beyond myself. This sense of cooperation with God in little things is what so astonishes me, for I never have felt it this way before. I need something, and turn round to find it waiting for me. I must work, to be sure, but there is God working along with me.”17<br><br>From a lonely missionary post in the Philippines, God raised Frank Laubach to the status of Christian world statesman and spokesman for Christ. He founded the World Literacy Crusade, still in operation today, and without any political appointment he was influential on United States foreign policy in the post-World War II years. But he was forever and foremost Christ’s man, and always knew that his brilliant ideas and incredible energy and effectiveness derived from his practice of constant conscious interface with God.
<empty-block/>
So when Jesus directs us to pray, “Thy kingdom come,” he does not mean we should pray for it to come into existence. Rather, we pray for it to take over at all points in the personal, social, and political order where it is now excluded: “On earth as it is in heaven.” With this prayer we are invoking it, as in faith we are acting it, into the real world of our daily existence.
<empty-block/>
The reality of God’s rule, and all of the instrumentalities it involves, is present in action and available with and through the person of Jesus. That is Jesus’ gospel. The obvious present reality of the kingdom is what provoked the responses we have just discussed. New Testament passages make plain that this kingdom is not something to be “accepted” now and enjoyed later, but something to be entered now (Matt. 5:20; 18:3; John 3:3, 5). It is something that already has flesh-and-blood citizens (John 18:36; Phil. 3:20) who have been transformed into it (Col. 1:13) and are fellow workers in it (Col. 4:11).
<empty-block/>
In the course of human events there are always plenty of things that are on the horizon of possibility but do not come about or that come about later. And there certainly is a dimension of still future realization of God’s rule. But the term eggiken—usually translated as “is at hand” or “has drawn nigh” in such passages as Matt. 3:2; 4:17; 10:7; Mark 1:15; and Luke 10:9, 11—is a verb form indicating a past and completed action. It is best translated simply “has come.”20
<empty-block/>
C. H. Dodd strikingly expresses how God’s kingdom was present with Christ and his apostles:<br><br>In what sense, then, did Jesus declare that the Kingdom of God was present? Our answer must at least begin with His own answer to John: “The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, the poor have the Gospel preached to them.” In the ministry of Jesus Himself the divine power is released in effective conflict with evil.21
<empty-block/>
The present situation of kingdoms in conflict is one eloquently portrayed in the Twenty-third Psalm: “In the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil.” Yes, but the “evil” is very much here to be feared. And: “Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies.” The “enemies” are certainly here, but we are safe in God’s hands even though other “kingdoms” loom over us and threaten us.
<empty-block/>
The “interior castle” of the human soul, as Teresa of Avila called it, has many rooms, and they are slowly occupied by God, allowing us time and room to grow. That is a crucial aspect of the conspiracy. But even this does not detract from the reality of the “kingdom among us.” Nor does it destroy the choice that all have to accept it and bring their life increasingly into it.
<empty-block/>
Electricity Is “at Hand”
<empty-block/>
As a child I lived in an area of southern Missouri where electricity was available only in the form of lightning. We had more of that than we could use. But in my senior year of high school the REA (Rural Electrification Administration) extended its lines into the area where we lived, and electrical power became available to households and farms.<br><br>When those lines came by our farm, a very different way of living presented itself. Our relationships to fundamental aspects of life—daylight and dark, hot and cold, clean and dirty, work and leisure, preparing food and preserving it—could then be vastly changed for the better. But we still had to believe in the electricity and its arrangements, understand them, and take the practical steps involved in relying on it.<br><br>You may think the comparison rather crude, and in some respects it is. But it will help us to understand Jesus’ basic message about the kingdom of the heavens if we pause to reflect on those farmers who, in effect, heard the message: “Repent, for electricity is at hand.” Repent, or turn from their kerosene lamps and lanterns, their iceboxes and cellars, their scrubboards and rug beaters, their woman-powered sewing machines and their radios with dry-cell batteries.
<empty-block/>
The power that could make their lives far better was right there near them where, by making relatively simple arrangements, they could utilize it. Strangely, a few did not accept it. They did not “enter the kingdom of electricity.” Some just didn’t want to change. Others could not afford it, or so they thought.
<empty-block/>
Another image may help us understand this “available” aspect of the kingdom, which is so easily overlooked. Think of visiting in a home where you have not been before. It is a fairly large house, and you sit for a while with your host in a living room or on the veranda. Dinner is announced, and he ushers you down a hall, saying at a certain point, “Turn, for the dining room is at hand,” or more likely, “Here’s the dining room.” Similarly Jesus directs us to his kingdom.<br><br>In these images something absolutely crucial to Jesus’ message is emphasized. There is no suggestion that electricity or the dining room hasn’t happened yet but is about to happen or about to be there—possibly if someone welcomes it or lets it come. Rather, they have now become available. And, similarly, the kingdom of God is also right beside us. It is indeed The Kingdom Among Us. You can reach it from your heart with your mouth—through even a shaky and stumbling confidence and confession that Jesus is the death-conquering Master of all (Rom. 10:9).<br><br>To be sure, that kingdom has been here as long as we humans have been here, and longer. But it has been available to us through simple confidence in Jesus, the Anointed, only from the time he became a public figure. It is a kingdom that, in the person of Jesus, welcomes us just as we are, just where we are, and makes it possible for us to translate our “ordinary” life into an eternal one. It is so available that everyone who from the center of his or her being calls upon Jesus as Master of the Universe and Prince of Life will be heard and will be delivered into the eternal kind of life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
You cannot call upon Jesus Christ or upon God and not be heard.
<empty-block/>
And the God who hears is also one who speaks. He has spoken and is still speaking. Humanity remains his project, not its own, and his initiatives are always at work among us. He certainly “gives us space,” as we say, and this is essential. But he continues to speak in ways that serious inquirers can hear if they will. We need not, as earlier described, stagger onward in darkness concerning what is truly good and really right. We need not fly upside down. There is a right-side up, and we can find it.—But we don’t have to. We are free. For now.
<empty-block/>
So, C. S. Lewis writes, our faith is not a matter of our hearing what Christ said long ago and “trying to carry it out.” Rather, “The real Son of God is at your side. He is beginning to turn you into the same kind of thing as Himself. He is beginning, so to speak, to ‘inject’ His kind of life and thought, His Zoe \[life\], into you; beginning to turn the tin soldier into a live man. The part of you that does not like it is the part that is still tin.”13
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
### Just forgiven? And is that really all there is to being a Christian? The gift of eternal life comes down to that? Quite a retreat from living an eternal kind of life now!<br><br>Christians certainly aren’t perfect. There will always be need for improvement. But there is a lot of room between being perfect and being “just forgiven” as that is nowadays understood. You could be much more than forgiven and still not be perfect. Perhaps you could even be a person in whom Jesus’ eternal kind of life predominates and still have room for growth.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Well, it certainly needs to be said that Christians are forgiven. And it needs to be said that forgiveness does not depend on being perfect. But is that really what the slogan communicates?<br><br>Unfortunately, it is not. What the slogan really conveys is that forgiveness alone is what Christianity is all about, what is genuinely essential to it.<br><br>It says that you can have a faith in Christ that brings forgiveness, while in every other respect your life is no different from that of others who have no faith in Christ at all. This view so pleasingly presented on bumpers and trinkets has deep historical roots. It is by now worked out in many sober tomes of theology, lived out by multitudes of those who sincerely self-identify as Christians.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
By now this bit of bumper-sticker theology has leaped out of traffic and onto Christian trinkets. There is a little bookmark adorned with flowers, bows, green sprigs, and fourteen tiny pink hearts, with a tassel at the top. In the center is a wide-eyed teddy bear that looks as if it might have inadvertently just done something naughty. The message below is—as you will now expect—“Christians aren’t perfect, just forgiven.”
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Suppose our failures occur, not in spite of what we are doing, but precisely because of it.<br><br>Suppose, to illustrate, that the educators who guide our school systems seriously considered the possibility that the low attainments of American schoolchildren are not in spite of what is done with them in school, but largely because of what they are taught and how they are taught. Or suppose that our national legislature began to think that our failure to come to grips with the national debt or violence in the streets is not in spite of what the legislature does, but because of it.<br><br>It may be hard to take such a suggestion seriously, but to do so might well provide a basis for genuine solutions to problems that now seem unsolvable.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
A leading American pastor laments, “Why is today’s church so weak? Why are we able to claim many conversions and enroll many church members but have less and less impact on our culture? Why are Christians indistinguishable from the world?”6<br><br>Should we not at least consider the possibility that this poor result is not in spite of what we teach and how we teach, but precisely because of it? Might that not lead to our discerning why the power of Jesus and his gospel has been cut off from ordinary human existence, leaving it adrift from the flow of his eternal kind of life?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
what then are we to say about the multitudes, right and left along the theological spectrum, who today self-identify as Christians while having hardly a whiff of Christlikeness about them and no idea that it might even be possible—who perhaps even have a settled conviction that genuine Christlikeness is impossible? What is the gospel they have heard?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
If you ask anyone from that 74 percent of Americans who say they have made a commitment to Jesus Christ what the Christian gospel is, you will probably be told that Jesus died to pay for our sins, and that if we will only believe he did this, we will go to heaven when we die.<br><br>In this way what is only one theory of the “atonement” is made out to be the whole of the essential message of Jesus. To continue with theological language for the moment, justification has taken the place of regeneration, or new life.8 Being let off the divine hook replaces possession of a divine life “from above.” For all of the talk about the “new birth” among conservative Christians, there is an almost total lack of understanding of what that new birth is in practical terms and of how it relates to forgiveness and imputed or transmitted righteousness.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
And so the only sure outcome of belief is that we are “just forgiven.” We are justified, which is often explained by saying that, before God, it is “just-as-if-I’d” never sinned at all. We may not have done or become anything positive to speak of. But when we come to heaven’s gate, they will not be able to find a reason to keep us out. The mere record of a magical moment of mental assent will open the door.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
The issue, so far as the gospel in the Gospels is concerned, is whether we are alive to God or dead to him. Do we walk in an interactive relationship with him that constitutes a new kind of life, life “from above”? As the apostle John says in his first letter, “God has given undying life to us, and that life is in his Son. Those who have the Son have life” (1 John 5:11–12).
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
What must be emphasized in all of this is the difference between trusting Christ, the real person Jesus, with all that that naturally involves, versus trusting some arrangement for sin-remission set up through him—trusting only his role as guilt remover. To trust the real person Jesus is to have confidence in him in every dimension of our real life, to believe that he is right about and adequate to everything.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Ryrie comments, with reference to the use of “gospel” in the Gospels of Mark and Luke, “Our Lord is the central theme of the good news.”14 And this is certainly right. But he and many others see no distinction between saying that and saying, “The Gospel is the good news about the death and resurrection of Christ”—or that it claims an arrangement for forgiveness of sin has been made that leaves Christ, the now living person, simply irrelevant to our present existence.<br><br>The sensed irrelevance of what God is doing to what makes up our lives is the foundational flaw in the existence of multitudes of professing Christians today. They have been led to believe that God, for some unfathomable reason, just thinks it appropriate to transfer credit from Christ’s merit account to ours, and to wipe out our sin debt, upon inspecting our mind and finding that we believe a particular theory of the atonement to be true—even if we trust everything but God in all other matters that concern us.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
It is left unexplained how it is possible that one can rely on Christ for the next life without doing so for this one, trust him for one’s eternal destiny without trusting him for “the things that relate to Christian life.” Is this really possible? Surely it is not! Not within one life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
When all is said and done, “the gospel” for Ryrie, MacArthur, and others on the theological right is that Christ made “the arrangement” that can get us into heaven. In the Gospels, by contrast, “the gospel” is the good news of the presence and availability of life in the kingdom, now and forever, through reliance on Jesus the Anointed. This was Abraham’s faith, too. As Jesus said, “Abraham saw my time and was delighted” (John 8:56).<br><br>Accordingly, the only description of eternal life found in the words we have from Jesus is “This is eternal life, that they \[his disciples\] may know you, the only real God, and Jesus the anointed, whom you have sent” (John 17:3). This may sound to us like “mere head knowledge.” But the biblical “know” always refers to an intimate, personal, interactive relationship.<br><br>Thus the prophet speaks for God in saying to Israel, “You are the only ones I have known from among all of the families of the earth” (Amos 3:2). And Mary, in response to the angel’s statement that she would bear a child, asks, “How can that be, since I know no man?” (Luke 1:35). Obviously God knows about other families on the earth, as Mary knows about men. The eternal life of which Jesus speaks is not knowledge about God but an intimately interactive relationship with him.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Here the descent of the current Christian left from the older liberal theology stands out. Robinson and those who adopt his version of the gospel rarely miss a chance to dismiss the “old man in the sky” view of God. Bishop James Pike used to say, “I don’t believe in a God that tinkers,” thus dismissing actual answers to prayer requests from human beings.20 He granted that prayer may make some mysterious, unscientific adjustment in life, but it will not evoke “answers” in any straightforward sense of the term—certainly not one that changes what would happen in the “natural” order anyway. So prayer proves to be little more than a ritual hand-waving at the cosmos that may, at most, bring personal comfort or help us improve our attitudes.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
So as things now stand we have, on the one hand, some kind of “faith in Christ” and, on the other, the life of abundance and obedience he is and offers. But we have no effective bridge from the faith to the life. Some do work it out. But when that happens it is looked upon as a fluke or an accident, not a normal and natural part of the regular good news itself. Prayer also may seem to “work” for some. But who knows how or why? And anyway, effectiveness in prayer is not required—either to go to heaven when you die or to be committed to the cause of liberation.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We settle back into de facto alienation of our religion from Jesus as a friend and teacher, and from our moment-to-moment existence as a holy calling or appointment with God. Some will substitute ritual behavior for divine vitality and personal integrity; others may be content with an isolated string of “experiences” rather than transformation of character.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Right at the heart of this alienation lies the absence of Jesus the teacher from our lives. Strangely, we seem prepared to learn how to live from almost anyone but him. We are ready to believe that the “latest studies” have more to teach us about love and sex than he does, and that Louis Rukeyser knows more about finances. “Dear Abby” can teach us more about how to get along with our family members and co-workers, and Carl Sagan is a better authority on the cosmos. We lose any sense of the difference between information and wisdom, and act accordingly.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Where we spontaneously look for “information” on how to live shows how we truly feel and who we really have confidence in. And nothing more forcibly demonstrates the extent to which we automatically assume the irrelevance of Jesus as teacher for our “real” lives.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Historically, conservative Christians became suspicious of any talk of Jesus as “teacher” because liberals, or “Modernists,” used it as a way of saying that he was not the divine Son and supernatural savior but “just a good man.” In addition, their understanding of salvation by grace alone cut off from the “essentials” in Christian faith his teachings about life and God’s kingdom. As we have seen, being a Christian then comes to have nothing to do with the kind of person one is.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Thomas Oden points out that “it becomes difficult if not impossible to build a plausible Christology out of a naive, mistaken, hapless, or ignorant Jesus.”24 And we should add, “Or on a historically inaccessible Jesus,” as he is almost universally taken to be by the theological left.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Sincere teaching on such matters simply does not appear on the Christian’s intellectual horizon as something that might be done. We do not seriously consider Jesus as our teacher on how to live, hence we cannot think of ourselves, in our moment-to-moment existence, as his students or disciples. So we turn to popular speakers and writers, some Christians and some not—whoever happens to be writing books and running talk shows and seminars on matters that concern us.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Must not all who speak for Christ constantly ask themselves these crucial questions:<br><br>Does the gospel I preach and teach have a natural tendency to cause people who hear it to become full-time students of Jesus?<br><br>Would those who believe it become his apprentices as a natural “next step”?<br><br>What can we reasonably expect would result from people actually believing the substance of my message?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
The condition so eloquently deplored by numerous leaders already quoted in this chapter is nothing but the natural consequence of the basic message of the church as it is heard today. It would be foolish to expect anything else than precisely what we have got.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
A saying among management experts today is, “Your system is perfectly designed to yield the result you are getting.” This is a profound though painful truth that must be respected by all who have an interest in Christian spiritual formation, whether for themselves as individuals or for groups or institutions.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
To counteract this we must develop a straightforward presentation, in word and life, of the reality of life now under God’s rule, through reliance upon the word and person of Jesus. In this way we can naturally become his students or apprentices. We can learn from him how to live our lives as he would live them if he were we. We can enter his eternal kind of life now.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We who profess Christianity will believe what is constantly presented to us as gospel. If gospels of sin management are preached, they are what Christians will believe. And those in the wider world who reject those gospels will believe that what they have rejected is the gospel of Jesus Christ himself—when, in fact, they haven’t yet heard it.<br><br>And so we have the result noted: the resources of God’s kingdom remain detached from human life. There is no gospel for human life and Christian discipleship, just one for death or one for social action. The souls of human beings are left to shrivel and die on the plains of life because they are not introduced into the environment for which they were made, the living kingdom of eternal life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
But this cannot come about unless what Jesus himself believed, practiced, and taught makes sense to us. And his message must come to us free of the deadening legalisms, political sloganeering, and dogmatic traditionalisms long proven by history to be soul-crushing dead ends
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Does what we have discussed in this chapter not make it clear that serious difficulties currently bar people of good intent from an effectual understanding of Jesus’ gospel for life and discipleship in his kingdom? We must now try to identify and remove these difficulties. If we cannot remove them, no gospel we bring can have a natural tendency to lead onward into a life of discipleship to Jesus and to personal fulfillment in the kingdom of the heavens.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Jesus’ good news about the kingdom can be an effective guide for our lives only if we share his view of the world in which we live. To his eyes this is a God-bathed and God-permeated world
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
It is a world filled with a glorious reality, where every component is within the range of God’s direct knowledge and control—though he obviously permits some of it, for good reasons, to be for a while otherwise than as he wishes. It is a world that is inconceivably beautiful and good because of God and because God is always in it. It is a world in which God is continually at play and over which he constantly rejoices. Until our thoughts of God have found every visible thing and event glorious with his presence, the word of Jesus has not yet fully seized us.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Central to the understanding and proclamation of the Christian gospel today, as in Jesus’ day, is a re-visioning of what God’s own life is like and how the physical cosmos fits into it. It is a great and important task to come to terms with what we really think when we think of God. Most hindrances to the faith of Christ actually lie, I believe, in this part of our minds and souls. If he cannot help us with understanding God’s life, he cannot help us at all to that salvation/life that is by faith. But of course he can and he does.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We should, to begin with, think that God leads a very interesting life, and that he is full of joy. Undoubtedly he is the most joyous being in the universe. The abundance of his love and generosity is inseparable from his infinite joy. All of the good and beautiful things from which we occasionally drink tiny droplets of soul-exhilarating joy, God continuously experiences in all their breadth and depth and richness.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We are enraptured by a well-done movie sequence or by a few bars from an opera or lines from a poem. We treasure our great experiences for a lifetime, and we may have very few of them. But he is simply one great inexhaustible and eternal experience of all that is good and true and beautiful and right. This is what we must think of when we hear theologians and philosophers speak of him as a perfect being. This is his life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Now, Jesus himself was and is a joyous, creative person. He does not allow us to continue thinking of our Father who fills and overflows space as a morose and miserable monarch, a frustrated and petty parent, or a policeman on the prowl.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
One cannot think of God in such ways while confronting Jesus’ declaration “He that has seen me has seen the Father.” One of the most outstanding features of Jesus’ personality was precisely an abundance of joy. This he left as an inheritance to his students, “that their joy might be full” (John 15:11). And they did not say, “Pass the aspirin,” for he was well known to those around him as a happy man. It is deeply illuminating of kingdom living to understand that his steady happiness was not ruled out by his experience of sorrow and even grief.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
So we must understand that God does not “love” us without liking us—through gritted teeth—as “Christian” love is sometimes thought to do. Rather, out of the eternal freshness of his perpetually self-renewed being, the heavenly Father cherishes the earth and each human being upon it. The fondness, the endearment, the unstintingly affectionate regard of God toward all his creatures is the natural outflow of what he is to the core—which we vainly try to capture with our tired but indispensable old word love.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
To trust in God, we need a rich and accurate way of thinking and speaking about him to guide and support our life vision and our will. Such is present in the biblical language, of course, and it continued to be carefully crafted in the works of Christian writers well into the twentieth century.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Still today the Old Testament book of Psalms gives great power for faith and life. This is simply because it preserves a conceptually rich language about God and our relationships to him. If you bury yourself in Psalms, you emerge knowing God and understanding life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
And that is by no means a matter, as some suggest, of the “poetic effect” of the great language. No mere emotional lift is involved. What makes the language great and provides the emotional lift is chiefly its picture of God and of life. We learn from the psalms how to think and act in reference to God. We drink in God and God’s world from them. They provide a vocabulary for living Godward, one inspired by God himself. They show us who God is, and that expands and lifts and directs our minds and hearts.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
God as real and present and ever reaching out to all humanity. I
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
First, I am struck by the comprehensive nature of this book. It gives me a Weltanschauung, a worldview. It provides me with the conceptual philosophy for understanding the meaning and purpose of human existence. It shows me how to make sense out of the whole of the biblical record. It helps me see that the teachings of Jesus are intelligent and vital and intently practical.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
the practical irrelevance of actual obedience to Christ accounts for the weakened effect of Christianity in the world today, with its increasing tendency to emphasize political and social action as the primary way to serve God. It also accounts for the practical irrelevance of Christian faith to individual character development and overall personal sanity and well-being.
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
not even those most dear to educators, concerning fairness and diversity. If you lowered a student’s grade just for saying on a test that discrimination is morally acceptable, for example, the student could contest that grade to the administration. And if that position on the moral acceptability of discrimination were the only point at issue, the student would win.<br><br>The teacher would be reminded that we are not here to impose our views on students, “however misguided the student might be.” And if the administration of the university did not reach that decision, a court of law soon would.
<empty-block/>
Why Be Surprised?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Rumors from the Intellectual Heights
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Life in the Dark
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Recently a pilot was practicing high-speed maneuvers in a jet fighter. She turned the controls for what she thought was a steep ascent—and flew straight into the ground. She was unaware that she had been flying upside down.<br><br>This is a parable of human existence in our times—not exactly that everyone is crashing, though there is enough of that—but most of us as individuals, and world society as a whole, live at high-speed, and often with no clue to whether we are flying upside down or right-side up. Indeed, we are haunted by a strong suspicion that there may be no difference—or at least that it is unknown or irrelevant.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
What is truly profound is thought to be stupid and trivial, or worse, boring, while what is actually stupid and trivial is thought to be profound. That is what it means to fly upside down.
<empty-block/>
The major problem with the invitation now is precisely overfamiliarity. Familiarity breeds unfamiliarity—unsuspected unfamiliarity, and then contempt. People think they have heard the invitation. They think they have accepted it—or rejected it. But they have not. The difficulty today is to hear it at all. Genius, it is said, is the ability to scrutinize the obvious. Written everywhere, we may think, how could the invitation be subtle, or deep? It looks like the other graffiti and even shows up in the same places. But that is part of the divine conspiracy.
<empty-block/>
Jesus offers himself as God’s doorway into the life that is truly life. Confidence in him leads us today, as in other times, to become his apprentices in eternal living. “Those who come through me will be safe,” he said. “They will go in and out and find all they need. I have come into their world that they may have life, and life to the limit.”<br><br>But intelligent, effectual entry into this life is currently obstructed by clouds of well-intentioned misinformation. The “gospels” that predominate where he is most frequently invoked speak only of preparing to die or else of correcting social practices and conditions. These are both, obviously, matters of great importance. Who would deny it? But neither one touches the quick of individual existence or taps the depths of the reality of Christ. Our usual “gospels” are, in their effects—dare we say it—nothing less than a standing invitation to omit God from the course of our daily existence.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
they were only responding to the striking availability of God to meet present human need through the actions of Jesus. He simply was the good news about the kingdom. He still is.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We have noted how he entered human history through the life of an ordinary family. But then, as God’s flash point in reigniting eternal life among us, he inducts us into the eternal kind of life that flows through himself. He does this first by bringing that life to bear upon our needs, and then by diffusing it throughout our deeds—deeds done with expectation that he and his Father will act with and in our actions.
<empty-block/>
The apostle Paul on one occasion describes it simply as “righteousness and peace and joy” of a type that only occurs “through the energizing of the Holy Spirit” (Rom. 14:17). That it is not of, or not derived from, this world or “here” does not mean that it is not real or that it is not in this world (John 18:36). It is, as Jesus said, constantly in the midst of human life (Luke 17:21; cf. Deut. 7:21). Indeed, it means that it is more real and more present than any human arrangement could ever possibly be.
<empty-block/>
GOSPELS OF SIN MANAGEMENT
<empty-block/>
ENTERING THE ETERNAL KIND OF LIFE NOW
<empty-block/>
Bar-Code Faith
<empty-block/>
Think of the bar codes now used on goods in most stores. The scanner responds only to the bar code. It makes no difference what is in the bottle or package that bears it, or whether the sticker is on the “right” one or not. The calculator responds through its electronic eye to the bar code and totally disregards everything else. If the ice cream sticker is on the dog food, the dog food is ice cream, so far as the scanner knows or cares.<br><br>On a recent radio program a prominent minister spent fifteen minutes enforcing the point that “justification,” the forgiveness of sins, involves no change at all in the heart or personality of the one forgiven. It is, he insisted, something entirely external to you, located wholly in God himself. His intent was to emphasize the familiar Protestant point that salvation is by God’s grace only and is totally independent of what we may do. But what he in fact said was that being a Christian has nothing to do with the kind of person you are. The implications of this teaching are stunning.<br><br>The theology of Christian trinkets says there is something about the Christian that works like the bar code. Some ritual, some belief, or some association with a group affects God the way the bar code affects the scanner.
<empty-block/>
occurred a moment of mental assent to a creed, or an association entered into with a church. God “scans” it, and forgiveness floods forth. An appropriate amount of righteousness is shifted from Christ’s account to our account in the bank of heaven, and all our debts are paid. We are, accordingly, “saved.” Our guilt is erased. How could we not be Christians?<br><br>For some Christian groups the “account” has to be appropriately serviced to keep the debts paid up, because we really are not perfect. For others—some strongly Calvinist groups—every debt past, present, and future is paid for at the initial scan. But the essential thing in either case is the forgiveness of sins. And the payoff for having faith and being “scanned” comes at death and after. Life now being lived has no necessary connection with being a Christian as long as the “bar code” does its job.<br><br>We do hear a lot of discussion concerning what good Christians do and do not do. But of course it is not necessary to be a good Christian in order to be forgiven. That’s the main point of the bar code, and it is correct.
<empty-block/>
Would God Really Do It That Way?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Some Puzzling Facts
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
According to Gallup surveys, 94 percent of Americans believe in God and 74 percent claim to have made a commitment to Jesus Christ.1 About 34 percent confess to a “new birth” experience. These figures are shocking when thoughtfully compared to statistics on the same group for unethical behavior, crime, mental distress and disorder, family failures, addictions, financial misdealings, and the like.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Are we to suppose that God gives us nothing that really influences character and spirituality? Are we to suppose that in fact Jesus has no substantial impact on our “real lives”?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Helmut Thielicke points out that we often wonder if the celebrities who advertise foods and beverages actually consume what they are selling.3 He goes on to say that this is the very question most pressing for those of us who speak for Christ. Surely something has gone wrong when moral failures are so massive and widespread among us. Perhaps we are not eating what we are selling. More likely, I think, what we are “selling” is irrelevant to our real existence and without power over daily life.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
God Really Doesn’t Change Our Behavior?
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
A well-known leader who has spent most of his life in Christian service, much of it at a national level, recently turned fifty. Looking back, he comments in his monthly magazine column that “in these last four decades my faith has truly taken a beating.” He tells how from his conversion at the age of ten he was taught that “if I was a Christian, then people would see a marked difference in my life!!! And…that the closer I was to God—the more spiritual I was—the greater and more visible that difference would be” (italics mine).<br><br>Now at fifty he has seen so many of his mentors “who stumbled and fell, never again to recover their faith; so many ‘truths’ about the Gospel that turned out to be false; so many casualties, so many losses, so many assumptions that turned out to be just that—assumptions, not truth.” Finally, he says, “I don’t believe that anymore.”<br><br>He still believes that Jesus changes you, but his definition of “change” has changed. “Whatever the change is, it is not so much outward as it is inward. This difference that God makes is often visible only to God…and no one else…. I haven’t abandoned my faith, I have abandoned a way of looking at my faith…. Life is different. But what is different is different than I thought.”4<br><br>The suggestion is that the change that makes a person Christian, whatever that is, may be totally undetectable from the human point of view. Only God’s “scanner” can detect it. Apparently that is “Christian reality” now.<br><br>At least many of our best-known leaders seem to think so.5
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
The current situation, in which faith professed has little impact on the whole of life, is not unique to our times, nor is it a recent development. But it is currently at an acute stage. History has brought us to the point where the Christian message is thought to be essentially concerned only with how to deal with sin: with wrongdoing or wrong-being and its effects. Life, our actual existence, is not included in what is now presented as the heart of the Christian message, or it is included only marginally. That is where we find ourselves today.
<empty-block/>
Gospels of Sin Management
<empty-block/>
Once we understand the disconnection between the current message and ordinary life, the failures just noted at least make a certain sense. They should be expected. When we examine the broad spectrum of Christian proclamation and practice, we see that the only thing made essential on the right wing of theology is forgiveness of the individual’s sins. On the left it is removal of social or structural evils. The current gospel then becomes a “gospel of sin management.”
<empty-block/>
Transformation of life and character is no part of the redemptive message. Moment-to-moment human reality in its depths is not the arena of faith and eternal living.
<empty-block/>
To the right, being a Christian is a matter of having your sins forgiven. (Remember that bumper sticker?) To the left, you are Christian if you have a significant commitment to the elimination of social evils. A Christian is either one who is ready to die and face the judgment of God or one who has an identifiable commitment to love and justice in society. That’s it.
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br><br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br><br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br><br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br><br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Many are distressed about this disjunction between faith and life, but they remain firmly pinned to it by their ideas about salvation. Many others are angry with such a view of being Christian because to them it seems irresponsible. They contemptuously refer to it as “cheap grace” or “fire insurance.” Some people actually reject Christianity because of it, while others insist that faith in Christ is a matter of righteous living in the social arena, standing up against social evils in behalf of love and justice.<br>But, to be quite frank, grace is cheap from the point of view of those who need it. That is why attacks on “cheap grace” never make much difference. To try to rule out unheroic Christianity by making grace expensive will only add to confusion about matters of vast importance. And if a fire is likely, it would not be a mark of wisdom to forgo insurance that really is available.<br>No one need worry about our getting the best of God in some bargain with him, or that we might somehow succeed in using him for our purposes. (“All this and heaven too,” as is sometimes humorously said.) Anyone who thinks this is a problem has seriously underestimated the intelligence and agility of our Father in the heavens. He will not be tricked or cheated. Any arrangement God has established will be right for him and right for us. We can count on it.<br>The real question, I think, is whether God would establish a bar code type of arrangement at all. It is we who are in danger: in danger of missing the fullness of life offered to us. Can we seriously believe that God would establish a plan for us that essentially bypasses the awesome needs of present human life and leaves human character untouched? Would he leave us even temporarily marooned with no help in our kind of world, with our kinds of problems: psychological, emotional, social, and global? Can we believe that the essence of Christian faith and salvation covers nothing...
... but death and after? Can we believe that being saved really has nothing whatever to do with the kinds of persons we are?<br>And for those of us who think the Bible is a reliable or even significant guide to God’s view of human life, can we validly interpret its portrayal of faith in Christ as one concerned only with the management of sin, whether in the form of our personal debt or in the form of societal evils?
**Tags:** purple
</content>
</page>