---
title: Winning the War in Your Mind
author: Craig Groeschel
source_url: https://www.notion.so/36432da2bdb9416180432ea5d1f8fd0b
date_added: 2026-05-30
date_published: unknown
type: Article
tags: ["topic-vault", "readwise-vault"]
referenced_by_topics: ["spiritual formation"]
---

Here is the result of "view" for the Page with URL https://www.notion.so/36432da2bdb9416180432ea5d1f8fd0b as of 2023-06-16T16:02:36.914Z:
<page url="https://www.notion.so/36432da2bdb9416180432ea5d1f8fd0b" icon="https://is4-ssl.mzstatic.com/image/thumb/Publication124/v4/cc/77/1c/cc771c99-66ac-1dff-8e59-bd6497214ced/9780310362739.jpg/1600x2400bb.jpeg">
<ancestor-path>
<parent-data-source url="collection://5b54c90e-5328-4c1a-8679-469de2932b1b" name="Library"/>
<ancestor-2-database url="https://www.notion.so/13ad939f560c414b825d45ac8c2a2118" title=""/>
<ancestor-3-page url="https://www.notion.so/92bfa9ac85f3481ab886518cb4f96498" title="readwise"/>
<ancestor-4-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580cab9f0c5a37ff8f1c6" title=""/>
<ancestor-5-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580809ca5cafcb22c1274" title=""/>
<ancestor-6-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb55809c8e5fd66f56d28031" title="Hunter Wilson"/>
</ancestor-path>
<properties>
{"Author":"Craig Groeschel","Category":"Books","Document Notes":"","Full Title":"Winning the War in Your Mind","Highlights":200,"Summary":"","Title":"Winning the War in Your Mind","date:Last Highlighted:is_datetime":1,"date:Last Highlighted:start":"2021-04-13T00:47:00.000Z","date:Last Synced:is_datetime":1,"date:Last Synced:start":"2023-06-16T16:02:00.000Z","topic vault":["https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb5580c6b2f6f171630c4113"],"url":"https://www.notion.so/36432da2bdb9416180432ea5d1f8fd0b","userDefined:URL":""}
</properties>
<content>
WHERE ARE YOUR THOUGHTS TAKING YOU?
<empty-block/>
OUR LIVES ARE ALWAYS MOVING IN THE DIRECTION OF OUR strongest thoughts. What we think shapes who we are
<empty-block/>
Highlighted Image
<empty-block/>
this is no exaggeration. Our lives do follow the direction of our thoughts. The better we grasp that truth, the better equipped we’ll be to change the trajectory of our lives.
<empty-block/>
In Philippians 4:8–9, the apostle Paul writes, “Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable—if anything is excellent or praiseworthy—think about such things. Whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me—put it into practice. And the God of peace will be with you.”<br>In these three sentences Paul moves from<br>thought (“think about such things”) to<br>action (“put it into practice”) to<br>experience (“the God of peace will be with you”)
<empty-block/>
Paul tells us that our thoughts shape our lives
<empty-block/>
The life we have is a reflection of what we think
<empty-block/>
What science is demonstrating today is what God told us through Solomon almost three thousand years ago: “For as he thinks in his heart, so is he” (Prov. 23:7 NKJV).<br>So if both the Bible and modern science teach us that our lives are moving in the direction of our strongest thoughts, then we need to ask ourselves, “Do I like the direction my thoughts are taking me?
<empty-block/>
You can stop believing the lies that hold you back.<br>You can end the vicious cycle of thoughts that are destructive to you and others.<br>You can allow God to renew your mind by saturating you with his unchanging truth.<br>You can let his thoughts become your thoughts.
<empty-block/>
God has not given us a spirit of fear, but of power and of love and of a sound mind.<br>—2 TIMOTHY 1:7 NKJV
<empty-block/>
I wonder if you feel locked up or taken captive. If so, have you considered that you might be trapped in a self-made prison? You may feel held back from living the life you want to live, not experiencing the relationship you want with God, with little to no hope for the future, but are you? If you think you’re trapped, if you believe there’s a lock on the door, you’ve bought into a lie. And it is the lie, nothing else, that is holding you back. Yet if you identify that lie, then you can remove it. You can replace it with the truth and be free. Your liberation is a simple two-step process:<br>Remove the lie.<br>Replace it with truth.
<empty-block/>
Ever wonder why you can’t shake a habit? Why you feel like you can’t connect with God? Why you lose your temper so easily? Why you too often make bad decisions? Why you and your spouse fight so much? Why you’re consumed with worry, fear, and negativity?<br>There is a reason why. Your mind is a war zone, and you are under attack. It’s critical that you become aware of the fight. You cannot change what you do not confront. If you ignore the battle, you lose the battle. The apostle Paul made this truth clear: “We are not fighting against flesh-and-blood enemies, but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world, against mighty powers in this dark world, and against evil spirits in the heavenly places” (Eph. 6:12 NLT)
<empty-block/>
YOU CANNOT CHANGE WHAT YOU DO NOT CONFRONT
<empty-block/>
Your adversary is not your boss, spouse, child, ex, or neighbor with the demonic dog that is always barking. You may not realize it, but the one you are fighting against is your spiritual enemy, the devil. Sound too extreme? That’s exactly what your enemy wants. There is an old saying that goes, “The greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the world he doesn’t exist.” Satan doesn’t want you to believe in him, so he works subtly. He knows that if you ignore him, he can invade your mind with impunity. He can plant seeds of doubt, confusion, worry, depression, and anxiety that will continue to grow.<br>Satan is your unseen enemy whose mission is to “steal and kill and destroy” (John 10:10), stop you (1 Thess. 2:18), and devour you (1 Peter 5:8). Satan despises you with more hatred than you can imagine. He wants to keep you from God and from the life God has for you. He wants to keep you from intimate relationships with those you love most. He wants to rob you of inner joy and abiding peace. He wants to strip you of the fulfillment you could have in knowing you are making a difference with your life
<empty-block/>
Simple. He lies. Just like I lied to Kevin about the locked door. Satan is a deceiver, and his strategy to defeat you is to persuade you to believe his lies. Jesus warned us, “There is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies” (John 8:44). I think it’s interesting that the only time Satan is called a creator, a father, is here in connection to lies
<empty-block/>
Understand this: Satan is your enemy, and every day he is prowling around (1 Peter 5:8), watching you, looking for a place where you might believe a lie.<br>If you succeed at something, maybe he can convince you that you don’t need God. If you fail, he’ll try to brainwash you into thinking you’ll always be a failure.<br>You have a great first date? He’ll suggest romance is the only thing that will make you happy. First date was a disaster? He’ll whisper that you’ll never have anyone love you for who you are.<br>If you do a nice thing for a difficult person, he’ll murmur that you’re a pretty great person yourself and really don’t need God’s grace. If instead you speak harshly to someone, he’ll whisper that you’re an awful, hateful person whom God could never love.<br>If you’re trying to stay away from porn, he will tell you everyone else is doing it. If you give in to porn, he’ll make you feel like you’re the only person sick enough to do such a disgusting thing.<br>Satan is conniving and trying to lock you in a prison of lies.<br>But you are not his prisoner of war, unless you choose to be. Those days can be over. That’s your call
<empty-block/>
For centuries people believed the world was flat. (Some still do. Don’t believe me? Google it. You’ll find there are “Flat Earthers” today.) Because they believed the wrong idea, it impacted their lives as if it were true. People would not venture too far out in the ocean for fear they might sail off the edge. Why? Once again, a lie believed as truth will affect your life as if it were true.<br>Growing up, a lot of us were told that going swimming right after eating wasn’t safe. Our parents made us wait thirty minutes after a meal to get in the pool. The only problem is that it’s not dangerous to swim after eating. That was and is a lie. Right now you may be thinking, No, I’m pretty sure that’s true. But it isn’t! Yet we believed it, so the lie affected our lives as if it were true.<br>Missing some swimming time isn’t a big deal, but what if you believe significant lies that have serious implications? What if you buy into the lie that you’ll never be good enough? Or that you made too many mistakes? Or that God doesn’t really care about you? Or that you’ll never be able to stop doing what you don’t want to do?<br>One more time, because this point is crucial: a lie believed as truth will affect your life as if it were true
<empty-block/>
No matter how hard you try, you’ll never measure up.<br>Why did I feel that way? Frankly, I’m not sure; I have never not felt that way. It seems self-doubt comes naturally to me, but at the same time I could give you a resume proving why I should feel that way.<br>Essentially, I was living a faithless life.
<empty-block/>
I have power over my thoughts. I am not captive to them. With God’s help, I can make them captive to me.<br>While I know those truths, at the same time the reality is that I am a struggling thought warrior who has battled insecurity, negativity, fear, and anxiety most of my life.
<empty-block/>
I felt I wasn’t good enough.<br>So I learned to play it safe and avoid risks at all costs. I felt that, given any opportunity, I would fail. I quietly came to define success as just not failing.<br>Chances are good you have your own set of lies holding you back. The lies nearly derailed my call to ministry.
<empty-block/>
In that moment, my heavenly Father said, “You are not who others say you are. You are who I say you are. And I say you are called to ministry.”
<empty-block/>
How about you? What negative messages did you take away from your childhood?<br>What unhealthy and destructive conclusions have you come to believe about yourself and your place in the world?<br>Satan’s strategy to win the battle for your mind is getting you to believe lies. If you believe a lie, it will hold you back from doing what God’s calling you to do.<br>The lie will keep you living in shame from the past, when God wants to set you free for a better future.<br>The lie will keep you from living with joy and freedom and confine you to a less-than existence
<empty-block/>
If you think you can’t do something, you probably won’t. If, on the other hand, you think you can, odds are you will. The same is true with your problems. If you dwell on them, they will overwhelm you. But if you look for solutions, you will find some.<br>If you feel like a victim, you’ll think like a victim, and the direction of your life could be one of misery. But if you believe that by the power of Christ you can overcome, then with his help you can. Consider this:<br>Who you are today is a result of your thoughts in the past.<br>Who you become in the future will reflect what you think about today
<empty-block/>
The goal of this exercise is to give you the opportunity to think about what you think about.
<empty-block/>
There are two parts to this exercise.
<empty-block/>
PART 1: INVENTORY
<empty-block/>
As you go through a normal day, take stock of your thoughts. Write them down, type them into the notes on your phone, or record them in your voice memo app to transcribe later. Trust me, if you really want to change, you need to invest the time to figure out what you are regularly thinking. Be honest. Don’t lie to yourself about the lies you tell yourself.<br>Evaluate the factors consistent in your day. Are you more negative in the morning but usually level out by the end of your workday? Or the opposite? Do you tend to bring negative thinking home with you? Or do you manage to leave it at work? Consider all the dynamics and patterns of your day. Pray and ask God to reveal anything he wants you to see and understand in how you think.<br>Once you see your thoughts in black and white, you can begin to work on your thought life. Jesus said the truth sets us free, but first we must reveal the truth.
<empty-block/>
PART 2 : AUDIT<br><br>Here are twenty questions to help you analyze what you regularly think. I’ve broken down the questions into two categories: defense (protection from the Enemy) and offense (growth toward God). Write down your honest answers. When you’re done, compare your defense and offense. This evaluation will help you see your thoughts and work on real change.
<empty-block/>
Remember, the goal is to think about what you think about. You can use this information as we move forward, to help you take practical steps in winning the battle in your mind. As we continue, we will get to some answers that deal with the truth you have revealed in this exercise. Be encouraged. You are one step closer to changing your thinking and believing what God says about you.
<empty-block/>
OFFENSE:<br>Are my thoughts building me up?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do I think peaceful thoughts?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Does my self-talk inspire me to take faith risks?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do my thoughts help me get closer to others?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do my thoughts reflect my faith?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Are my thoughts God-honoring?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do my thoughts reflect my hope in Christ?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do they inspire me to believe I can make a difference in the world?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do they equip me to become more like Jesus?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do my thoughts connect to the vision God has for my life?<br>\[Your Notes
<empty-block/>
On a typical day:<br>DEFENSE:<br>Are my thoughts tearing me down?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do I think worried thoughts?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Does my self-talk cause me to shrink back in fear?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do my thoughts cause me to keep people at a distance?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Are my unhealthy thoughts keeping me from the life I want?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Are my unhealthy thoughts keeping me from the life God wants for me?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Are my thoughts negative, toxic, or self-deprecating?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Does my inner voice tell me I’m helpless or that life is hopeless?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do I find myself skeptical of others?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br><br>Do I lean toward imagining worst-case scenarios?<br>\[Your Notes\]
<empty-block/>
Incredible as it is to consider, Paul wrote some of his teachings while in prison. And yes, his door was actually locked. Yet even though his body was behind bars, Paul’s mind was still free. How? He had taken his thoughts captive long before he entered a jail cell. He knew two truths that we also need to know:<br>The battle for your life is won or lost in your mind.<br>Your thoughts will control you, so you have to control your thoughts.
<empty-block/>
Paul had not always been a thought warrior. Check out how he described himself in Romans 7:15–24:<br>I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do I do not do, but what I hate I do. And if I do what I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good. As it is, it is no longer I myself who do it, but it is sin living in me. For I know that good itself does not dwell in me, that is, in my sinful nature. For I have the desire to do what is good, but I cannot carry it out. For I do not do the good I want to do, but the evil I do not want to do—this I keep on doing. Now if I do what I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.<br>So I find this law at work: Although I want to do good, evil is right there with me. For in my inner being I delight in God’s law; but I see another law at work in me, waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me. What a wretched man I am!
<empty-block/>
That does not sound like a guy who has mastered his thoughts. While we all get what he is saying, that just sounds a little crazy. But check out how Paul describes himself in Philippians 4:12: “I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation.” Now, that does sound like a guy who has mastered his thoughts.
<empty-block/>
You and I, however, are actually in a war. I know. I can find it hard to believe too. Because most days, it just doesn’t feel that way. Life just seems normal.<br>But we are in a war. One that has less to do with our thumbs and everything to do with what’s above our eyebrows.<br>I don’t know about you, but I have never glared at the devil and said with him, “One, two, three, four, I declare a spiritual war.” But maybe it’s time? Forget the thumbs. Declare war.<br>Yet Paul said, “We do not wage war as the world does” (2 Cor. 10:3).<br>The problem is that many Christians don’t wage war at all. Satan is assaulting us with evil. He’s delivering blows of deception and bombarding us with lies. But we can be oblivious to the attacks.<br>As a result, our lives are not what we want, and we numb ourselves to reality. We long for more but settle for less
<empty-block/>
To win the battle for our minds, we must engage, because there is no other way for us to defeat evil. The days of being neutral must be over.
<empty-block/>
If I poured more energy into being a better pastor, I felt like I was failing as a husband and dad. If I gave my best to my family, I was sure I was letting God down and failing the people in my church. Inside my mind, land mines were everywhere and I was dodging bullets.<br>My strongest thoughts were centered on my weakness, and I knew they were leading me to a place I did not want to go. Finally, I decided I’d had enough. I had to do something. It was time to win the battle for my mind.<br>One, two, three, four, I declare a thought war.<br>For about two years, my mind was my number one priority of prayer. I read so many books on the topic that I lost count. I also received counseling from a psychologist and confided in trusted friends and mentors.<br>I discovered and started using tools that allowed me to practice two disciplines: retrain my thought patterns and reorient my trajectory.<br>Bottom line, I knew that if I ignored the battle any longer, I’d lose it.<br>So I changed my thinking, and that decision changed my life
<empty-block/>
The lies we believe and base our lives upon are strongholds. Paul said, “The weapons we fight with . . . have divine power to demolish strongholds” (2 Cor. 10:4). So we need to demolish those lies that harm us.<br>The word stronghold is translated from the Greek word ochuroma, which means “to fortify.” In ancient times, a stronghold was a building, a fortress built on top of the highest peak in the city. This citadel was surrounded by a reinforced wall up to twenty feet thick.
<empty-block/>
Like the walls of the strongholds, our lies have been reinforced over and over to become bigger and stronger. We have believed them for so long, they have become a part of us. We believe our walls protect us. We think they are impenetrable. And yet they often keep the truth unapproachable to us.<br>We have mental and emotional strongholds—the lies that have a “strong hold” on us.<br>I told you before about my belief that I could never be enough—not good enough, smart enough, or successful enough. I thought I had to prove I was worthy. You may have read that and thought, But Craig, you’re a pastor. You know the Bible. God tells us that we don’t need to be enough. Jesus was enough for us. Craig, you know that God loves you and that’s all that matters. Yes, you would be right. I did know that. I taught that. But deep down I felt like that truth applied to everyone but me
<empty-block/>
What’s your stronghold?<br>What lie is holding you hostage?<br>What mistruth keeps you from taking a step of faith?<br>What wrong thought pattern robs you of living a life of freedom and joy?<br>Know this: You cannot defeat what you cannot define. You have to identify the lie that has become a stronghold for you. You must realize the negative impact it’s had on you and others.
<empty-block/>
If you want to truly change your life, you cannot just change your behavior. Even if you change your actions for a while, the original issue will just reestablish itself. That’s why Christianity has never been about behavior modification; it’s about life transformation.<br>We’ve all experienced that frustration, right? We make a New Year’s resolution or some commitment to start or stop doing something. Lose weight, quit smoking, pray more, stop yelling at the kids. Well, for a few weeks it seems to work, and then we go right back to doing what we always do. Why? We haven’t gotten to the root of the problem: the lie we believe.<br>Addressing the problem is attacking the city. Identifying and destroying the lie is pulling down the stronghold. Both are necessary to win the war.<br>To do both and experience success, we need God’s power. We cannot have victory without his strength and support.<br>I have good news that might sound like bad news at first. You ready?<br>You don’t have what it takes to win the war. Neither do I.<br>You know it because you’ve tried. You’ve tried to change your thinking, tried to change your life. You’ve done everything you can, but you always end up back in the same place. You keep doing what you don’t want to do and not doing what you want to do, just like Paul. You keep falling down and falling short. I get it. Been there, done that.<br>All the trying and failing and falling can lead to a place where we feel like giving up.<br>What’s the problem? The power you need is a power you don’t possess. Relying on your own power is self-help, and self-help goes only skin deep.<br>You have a devious spiritual enemy. You have reinforced strongholds. What stands against you is formidable. Fighting in your own power is like attacking Godzilla with a flyswatter.<br>Admitting that you need a power you don’t possess is vital, even though it may be difficult. I know it has been for me. If you’ve been taught to be an independent, self-reliant, pull-yourself-upby-your-bootstraps individual, confessing you don’t have what it takes might feel like weakness. But it’s not. It takes real strength to admit, I can’t do this on my own. I need power greater than I possess
<empty-block/>
Remember the popular definition of insanity? Keep doing the same thing, expecting different results. If you have tried with everything you have and it hasn’t worked, stop. Don’t keep doing the same thing. You’ll get the same results. If you feel like you just have to admit defeat and stop trying, don’t do that either. Because you’ll keep living the same life.<br>Don’t give up. Look up.
<empty-block/>
To bring down your strongholds, it’s time to go up. As a child of God, you have access to everything that belongs to your heavenly Father. So look up, go up, and access the power God has that you need to remove lies and replace them with truth. Ask him to show you the lies that you have believed for too long. Tell him you want your mind to be filled with his truths instead of the devil’s falsehoods. And then thank him for hearing you
<empty-block/>
IDENT IFYING THE LIES YOU BEL IEVE
<empty-block/>
IN THE FIRST EXERCISE, YOU TOOK AN HONEST INVENTORY and made an audit of
<empty-block/>
how you tend to think on a regular basis. In this exercise, we’re going to dive deeper and get more specific.<br>I want to repeat a crucial section of this chapter that needs to be connected to this exercise:<br>What lie is holding you hostage?<br>What mistruth keeps you from taking a step of faith?<br>What wrong thought pattern robs you of living a life of freedom and joy?<br>Know this: You cannot defeat what you cannot define. You have to identify the lie that has become a stronghold for you. You must realize the negative impact it’s had on you and others.
<empty-block/>
He has no idea that the only thing keeping him constrained is a lie he believes.
<empty-block/>
You are constrained by a lie, something that doesn’t exist. The Enemy has arranged enough hurtful circumstances, in key places of your life, in which you got just enough jolt—a bit of a shock, a sting of pain to your heart—that you have decided trying even one more time is just not worth the risk. What makes it worse is that the number of places where you have stopped trying is growing ever larger
<empty-block/>
As we’ve discussed, the greatest weapon in Satan’s arsenal is the lie. Perhaps his only weapon is the lie. The first glimpse we have of the devil in the Bible, we see him deceiving Adam and Eve in the garden. He created doubt in Eve’s mind by asking her,<br>“Did God really say, ‘You must not eat from any tree in the garden’?”<br>The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, but God did say, ‘You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die.’”<br>“You will not certainly die,” the serpent said to the woman. “For God knows that when you eat from it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.”<br>— GENESIS 3:1–5
<empty-block/>
Satan will whisper accusing questions and deceptive statements. He schemes to twist your mind, because if he can, he then<br>diverts you from your purpose,<br>distracts you from God’s voice,<br>destroys your potential.
<empty-block/>
If he can get you to believe a lie, your life will be affected as if that lie were true.<br>Unfortunately, Satan’s lies are easy to believe. Why? Part of the reason is that because of sin, we have a flawed internal lie detector. God warned us:<br>“The heart is deceitful above all things and beyond cure” (Jer. 17:9).<br>“There is a way that appears to be right, but in the end it leads to death” (Prov. 14:12).
<empty-block/>
If Satan’s primary weapon is lies, then our greatest counter-weapon is the truth of God’s Word. Not just reading the Bible but learning to wield Scripture as a divine weapon. God wants us to view his Word that way. See how Hebrews 4:12 offers a direct solution to the warning of Jeremiah 17:9: “The word of God is alive and active. Sharper than any double-edged sword, it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart.”
<empty-block/>
In Ephesians 6:17, Paul’s legendary armor of God passage, the Word of God is called “the sword of the Spirit.” God’s Word was the first weapon I learned to use to remove lies and replace them with truth, changing both my thinking and my life. “Do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind” (Rom. 12:2).<br>The second half of that sentence is in the passive voice, meaning it is not something we do but instead something that is done to us. The good news is that God is ready to renew our minds by leading us to “a knowledge of the truth” (2 Tim. 2:25). Why? So we can “come to \[our\] senses and escape from the trap of the devil, who has taken \[us\] captive to do his will” (v. 26). “Then,” as Jesus said, “\[we\] will know the truth, and the truth will set \[us\] free” (John 8:32).
<empty-block/>
We’ve been held captive by the lies we believe, so now we are going to take those lies captive. Capturing the lie is not so easy, because first we must realize the lie. How? Here is our three-step process:<br>Identify the problem.<br>Ask probing questions.<br>Pinpoint the lie.
<empty-block/>
This process can work because while you don’t know the lies you believe are lies, you do know that the problems you experience are problems. Problems are easier to identify, so if you’re willing to ask some probing questions, you will be able to pinpoint the lies that are holding you captive.
<empty-block/>
You have identified a problem. Now ask probing questions like:<br>Why am I doing this?<br>When did this start?<br>How does this make me feel?<br>Is fear driving this?<br>If so, what am I afraid of?<br>Is there a certain trigger that prompts this behavior?<br>If so, why do I often spend so compulsively?
<empty-block/>
That’s the problem; now ask probing questions.<br>What is driving my behavior?<br>What need do I feel this is meeting?<br>Does when I do this help me understand why I do it?<br>What is different about this habit than others I have been able to quit?
<empty-block/>
The questions may lead you to the conclusion that a substance you use (is chocolate ice cream a substance?) helps relieve stress and gives you a temporary feeling of peace. You may realize something is just providing a momentary endorphin rush that never ends in a good place.<br>Your first thought might be, What’s wrong with that? but I’m guessing you already know. God promises to be our refuge, the one who gives us rest, our peace provider. So who might put the idea in your head that God can’t do what he promises and that you need to turn to something other than him instead?
<empty-block/>
Maybe your problem is that you worry constantly. You are always trying to plan out all the details of your future because you cannot stand not knowing the plan.<br>Get alone, turn off the phone, pray for help in being honest with yourself, and ask probing questions, such as:<br>When did this start?<br>Why do I feel this way?<br>Why do I insist on being in control when I know, deep down, I’m not?<br>What is the real need I’m trying to meet with this wrong thinking?<br>Then pinpoint the lie. It could be that you believe God can’t really be trusted. You need to be in control, because that is your best bet at getting the life you want. You realize that rather than surrendering yourself to God, you are trying to manipulate him to serve your own purposes.
<empty-block/>
Eventually I pinpointed the lie: I believed my worth was based on what other people thought of me. The problem was I had become a people pleaser.<br>I believed a lie, and it affected my life as if it were true.
<empty-block/>
Shouldn’t we take the same approach that Jesus did?<br>We are going to “take captive every thought to make it obedient to Christ” (2 Cor. 10:5) by using our process to pinpoint the lie, and then we will replace that lie with the truth that sets us free.
<empty-block/>
Jesus’ clear example, detailed for us in Matthew 4, is why it is essential that we know the Bible. As followers of Christ, we prioritize reading the Bible, listen to Bible teaching, join Bible studies, and get God’s Word into our hearts so we can wield the sword against the lies of the Enemy.
<empty-block/>
If I had more, then I would be happy.”
<empty-block/>
“I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want. I can do all this through him who gives me strength” (Phil. 4:12–13).
<empty-block/>
Now write this biblical truth into your own declaration: “I can be content regardless of my circumstances—in plenty or in want—because no matter what I don’t have, I know I do have Jesus. That means I can ‘rejoice in the Lord always’ (Phil. 4:4).”
<empty-block/>
You captured the lie: you believe you need whatever it is to help relieve stress and give you peace.<br>What’s the truth? Jesus said, “Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy and my burden is light” (Matt. 11:28–30).
<empty-block/>
Your declaration: “I do need help; I need God’s help. What I am using may numb me to my problem but does not help me. God tells me to come to him when I am weary, burdened, or overwhelmed. He tells me to ‘cast all \[my\] anxiety on him because he cares for \[me\]’ (1 Peter 5:7), and he promises to be my ‘refuge and strength, an ever-present help in trouble’ (Ps. 46:1).”
<empty-block/>
Lie: “God can’t really be trusted. I need to be in control of my own life.”<br>Truth: “God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us” (Rom. 5:8).<br>Declaration: “God loves me more than I love myself. He knows me more than I know myself. He has my best interests in mind, and he can be trusted. If he ‘did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all—how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?’” (Rom. 8:32).
<empty-block/>
truth, not just for me but for you, is that our value is based not on what we do but on who made us (Ps. 139:13–16)
<empty-block/>
The truth, again not just for me but for you, is that our value is based not on how we feel about ourselves but on what someone else will pay for us (1 Peter 1:18–19).
<empty-block/>
So now whenever I think I need to impress people, I take that thought captive and make it obedient to Christ. The verb tense of “take captive” in the original language of the Bible implies a repeated and continuous action. This is not something you do once. This is something you will have to do thousands of times in your life, maybe dozens of times a day. The definition of a principle is a decision you make once and then live by.
<empty-block/>
Dig in, go deep, and allow God to show you his truth in his Word. You will need to find truths in the Bible you can use as your own, personal truths to replace the lies you are believing. A final encouragement: anything you change in your life can affect future generations and alter the course of your family line for Christ.
<empty-block/>
Do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.<br>— ROMANS 12:2
<empty-block/>
Why does it seem like our lives aren’t working when we need them to work?<br>Why do we lack the power to live the way we want?<br>Why do we often make so many irrational and self-defeating decisions?<br>Why do we try so hard to change but end up doing the things we hate?
<empty-block/>
commit to stop arguing with your spouse, then keep arguing with your spouse?<br>worry nonstop even though you know it’s a waste of time and makes you sick?<br>exaggerate to impress others even though that’s not the kind of person you want to be?<br>freak out because your credit card bill is so high, then continue to make more unnecessary purchases?<br>scroll on your phone for hours instead of talking to your spouse and kids, who are sitting only a few feet away?<br>decide you are going to lose weight and then find yourself grabbing a soda and candy bar when you stop to get gas?
<empty-block/>
You have crossed wires. We all do it.<br>The reason we make these poor decisions is because of how our brains work. So we need a solution that works with the way we think. We have to not only recognize the unhealthy patterns but also figure out the underlying problem. Stop the car, crawl under the dash, and find out what went wrong.<br>If we want to win the war in our minds, we have to be willing to rewire our thought patterns, rewire our brains.
<empty-block/>
Every thought you have produces a neurochemical change in your mind. Your brain literally redesigns itself around that thought.<br>The brain is a command center that directs the parts of your body through neurons. Neurons link together to create messages. The same message sent multiple times will create a neural pathway. The presence of a neural pathway makes a thought easier to think and makes it easier for your body to send that same message again.<br>Think of neural pathways as ruts in your brain
<empty-block/>
In a similar way, repeated thoughts create paths in our brains. Again, neural pathways are brain ruts.<br>These ruts are often carved deeper by the bundle of nerves at the base of our brain stem known as the reticular activating system (RAS). The RAS sifts through millions of pieces of sensory data being sent to our brains and groups them according to relevance and similarity. If the information will keep us alive, prevent problems, avert danger, or bring pleasure, the RAS is activated. It’s your brain’s system for filtering through all the data in your life and allowing you to focus on what’s most pertinent and ignore the rest.<br>Our RASs also utilize our established beliefs to screen incoming information. This is part of the reason we so often get what we expect. If you keep thinking you’re a victim who never has a steady job or long-lasting relationships, you are training your brain to look for evidence which supports that belief and to filter out evidence which doesn’t. You condition your brain to reinforce what you already believe. You create a victim rut. The tires drop in, you let go of the steering wheel, and you travel down the victim road.<br>Your brain is designed to look for patterns and create neurological pathways to help you keep thinking the things you keep thinking and doing the things you keep doing.<br>This is why thinking new thoughts or trying new things is awkward the first time. Remember when you first tried to ride a bike or play the piano or do calculus? You thought it would never happen. But as you think that thought or do that thing again and again, it becomes effortless. (Except for maybe calculus. But you know what I mean.) The saying “Practice makes perfect” makes even more sense now, doesn’t it?<br>Thinking that thought or doing that thing again and again eventually becomes effortless. Remember how great you got at explaining your favorite hobby or playing a sport or game? The more often you did it, the easier it became. Unknowingly, you created these well-traveled neural pathways that made something easier that was once difficult
<empty-block/>
Repetition formed helpful ruts.
<empty-block/>
Feeling uncomfortable, you thought, This is dumb. Why am I doing this? You may have felt guilty. But you also got a little jolt of pleasure. That buzz is a chemical your brain releases called dopamine. That little natural high is your brain’s way of saying, I like that. Let’s think that again! Let’s do that again!<br>So you checked out the cute trainer at the gym again, drank another glass of wine when you were stressed, or lied to a friend to get out of something. This time felt a little less awkward, and you got another hit of dopamine. That led you to do it again. The third time was much easier. Why? You were developing a neural pathway. Do the same thing enough, and you will have a rut that you fall into automatically.<br>You were designed to smoothly, efficiently create and fall into habits, into neurological ruts.<br>That is helpful for brushing your teeth.<br>That is harmful for overeating.<br>If you find yourself stuck in unhealthy ruts, there’s some good news: God has given us a way out. And you don’t have to wait until you’re driving in Alaska in July.
<empty-block/>
One of my most frustrating mental ruts involves finances. I am always tempted to believe the lie that I can find security in money instead of in God.
<empty-block/>
But in my heart I know and believe that God is my provider. Yet my thoughts get trapped in the same old rut of worrying that I won’t have enough to provide security and stability for the people I love.<br>So I identified a lie I believe that leads me into an irrational, self-defeating mental rut. What should I do next? You know from the previous chapter: ask probing questions.<br>Why do I believe this lie? When did this false belief start
<empty-block/>
every time I thought about money, my reflex reaction was to worry and try to create financial security.
<empty-block/>
My mindset was driven by a deep fear of scarcity and poverty, even while owing no one and making enough money. Why? I had spent years developing neural pathways, and the easiest thing was for me to fall into those same unhealthy mental ruts.
<empty-block/>
Unless we decide to break the pattern, our lives will continue moving in the wrong direction. In a circle that never goes anywhere. It’s normal. Easy. The same old rut.
<empty-block/>
I had a rut. But what I needed God to do then was to give me a new rut.
<empty-block/>
IN THIS EXERCISE, I WANT YOU TO WRITE DOWN ANY PLACES in your life where lies have crossed your wires and created ruts in your thinking. Using what you wrote in exercise 3 and considering the many examples I gave you in this chapter, ask God to speak to you and reveal the origin of your ruts. If at all possible, as in the situation with my grandma, try to go back to the source.
<empty-block/>
Whether or not you can discover where these things began, the primary goal of this exercise is to write down and face any and every harmful, hurtful rut that has been created in your mind. You are walking through a personal journey, one step at a time, that can lead you to a renewed mind and a changed life.
<empty-block/>
The problem with how we attack our problems is that we go after the problem. We focus solely on the behavior by making a commitment to start or stop doing something.<br>You’ve done this too, right? You’ve decided, perhaps even declared, that you were going to change.<br>I’m going to quit smoking on January 1st!<br>This year I’m going to eat healthy and exercise every day!<br>I’m going to stop dating anyone who is mean to me. In fact, I’m not going to date at all!<br>I’m tired of wasting my time on social media and comparing my life with everyone else’s. I’m getting off for good this time!<br>That’s it. This is the last time. I will never look at pornography again!<br>I’m not going to exaggerate or lie or gossip to get attention or feel better about myself. No more!<br>I’m going to read the Bible every morning this whole year!
<empty-block/>
Behavior modification doesn’t work, because the focus is only on modifying behavior. You don’t get to the root of the problem, which is the thought that produces the behavior. To be more specific, the problem is the neural pathway that leads to the behavior.
<empty-block/>
Thinking I can change a behavior just by removing the behavior is absurd. The behavior isn’t the root problem. The neural pathway that leads me to the behavior is the problem. If I stop a behavior, it will come back, unless I<br>remove the lie at the root of the behavior, and<br>replace the neural pathway that leads me to the behavior.
<empty-block/>
To make sure we understand what we’re talking about, let’s spell out the differences between our two similar words:<br><br>A rut is typically formed in mud and becomes a nuisance, even a danger. A rut is unintentionally created, has no purpose, and requires repair.<br>A trench is intentionally dug to deliver a necessary resource. A trench has a specific purpose and fixes an existing problem.
<empty-block/>
We know that the only antidote for a lie is truth. That’s why our first tool was the Replacement Principle: Remove the lies, replace with truth. The antidote for a negative neural pathway is a new neural pathway. Instead of living in a rut, you can create a truth trench that runs deeper, diverting the flow of your thoughts from old pathways to new ones.
<empty-block/>
We have a series of set thoughts we think each time we are triggered. For you, the trigger might be feeling alone, fearing failure, or being around people who are drinking; you fall into the same series of thoughts you always fall into, and they lead to the same behavior. We are now going to strategically choose a new series of thoughts.<br>Where will we get these new thoughts? Hint: we won’t get them from scrolling through social media posts, listening to our favorite playlist, or phoning a friend for their opinion.<br>To stop the lies and replace them with truth, we need to look to God’s Word
<empty-block/>
Using his Word, we will create a trench of truth.
<empty-block/>
For this to work, we need to do more than just know God’s Word; we need to internalize it. The author of Psalm 119 understood this when he wrote, “I have hidden your word in my heart that I might not sin against you” (v. 11).
<empty-block/>
The second tool for changing your thinking is the Rewire Principle: Rewire your brain, renew your mind. I told you earlier about my financial rut. Any trigger about money leads me to fear, thoughts of how I don’t have enough, and my need to save more to create security. When I am triggered about money, I fall into a rut—that’s the way my brain works—so I need to create a trench of truth
<empty-block/>
What does the Bible say that applies directly to my fears and issues about money? Here are some of my verses:<br>“I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want” (Phil. 4:12).<br>“I will save you, and you will be a blessing” (Zech. 8:13).<br>“It is more blessed to give than to receive” (Acts 20:35).<br>“God is able to bless you abundantly, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work” (2 Cor. 9:8).<br>“God will meet all your needs according to the riches of his glory in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:19).
<empty-block/>
Money is not and never will be a problem for me.<br>My God is an abundant provider who meets every need.<br>Because I am blessed, I will always be a blessing.<br>I will lead the way with irrational generosity, because I know it’s truly more blessed to give than to receive.
<empty-block/>
That’s just one of my declarations that speaks directly to a problem that has plagued me for years. These statements create a new pathway, leading me to a life of peace and generosity.
<empty-block/>
When I am stressed or in times of distress, I turn to God, not food.<br>I come to Jesus because he is what I really need.<br>He is my strength, my fortress, and my refuge.
<empty-block/>
Lust is not my master.<br>God has redeemed me and given me pure thoughts.<br>I will not look lustfully, because I’ve made that covenant with my eyes and with my God, who strengthens me.<br>God is always faithful and, when I am tempted, will always provide a way out.
<empty-block/>
Record them in your voice memos and listen as you exercise or drive. Repetition will dig your new trench deeper and deeper, making the new pathway easier and more accessible
<empty-block/>
All this might feel foolish at first. Remember, anything new can feel strange in the beginning. You will be saying something you want to believe, but your life will be saying something different. That’s okay. Don’t be discouraged. Don’t give up. The gravitational pull toward your old negative thoughts will likely be stronger than you can imagine. Resist those lies. Keep renewing your mind with God’s truth, and it will become true of you.
<empty-block/>
For years I thought that if I went to the gym, threw some weights around, and grunted a lot, I would somehow be in good physical shape. What I didn’t realize was that even more than what I do with my body, physical fitness is about what I put in my body. If I am to be truly healthy, what goes into me has to be healthy.<br>The same is true with our minds. What we put in our minds comes out in our lives. Every action we take, every word we say, and every attitude we express originates in our thoughts.
<empty-block/>
But what’s crazy is how little attention we give to what goes into our minds. People who have high-performance cars put in only high-octane gasoline. People who care about their dogs choose pet food that has antioxidants and the right balance of meats, vegetables, grains, and fruits. We can be so careful about what we put into our cars or feed our pets yet so careless about what we put into our minds.
<empty-block/>
More than two thousand years ago, our thoughtology professor Paul taught us that same truth when he wrote, “Those who are dominated by the sinful nature think about sinful things, but those who are controlled by the Holy Spirit think about things that please the Spirit. So letting your sinful nature control your mind leads to death. But letting the Spirit control your mind leads to life and peace” (Rom. 8:5–6 NLT).<br>Paul taught that if you allow a thought into your mind, it will come out in your life. So if you want to change your life, you have to change your thinking. You need a new declaration.<br>We need to be diligent about what we allow into our minds! Why? Because what consumes our minds controls our lives.<br>That’s why I meditate on truth, specifically on Bible verses that apply to my strongholds and on the declarations I have written to create new neural pathways.
<empty-block/>
Now, I don’t know what springs to mind for you when you encounter the word meditation, but I can tell you what the biblical understanding of it is: focusing one’s thoughts on the things of God. The Bible talks a lot about meditating. We are told to focus on, to meditate on, God’s goodness and God’s Word
<empty-block/>
Eastern meditation is an emptying of your mind. What I’m suggesting—what the Bible calls for—is the opposite. Christian meditation is filling your mind with God’s truth, being strategic and deliberate about what you allow into your mind. We make the law of exposure work for us instead of against us. We win the war in our minds by creating a solution for our mental ruts: trenches of truth that work with the way our brains work.
<empty-block/>
What do I do with these declarations? I meditate on them by writing, thinking, and confessing these truths until I believe them. When I repeat these declarations again and again, scientifically speaking I am creating new neural pathways. I am digging trenches of truth deeper and deeper for the purpose of changing my mind and my life. And, as I shared about my daughter Catie at the restaurant, I will change my family legacy.<br>I am allowing God’s truth to renew my mind.<br>That’s our plan:<br>Identify the rut.<br>Create a new trench of truth with God’s truth.<br>Write a declaration, think it, and confess it until you believe it.<br>This will take some work. It will not be easy. But if you will put in the time and energy, you will create new trenches of truth so God can renew your mind.
<empty-block/>
I APOLOGIZE IN ADVANCE, BUT I AM ABOUT TO GROSS YOU out. But, well, it’s necessary and for your own good.<br>In Joshua 1:8, Psalm 1:2, and at least six other passages in the Psalms, God tells us to ruminate. The word meditate in these verses is the same as the word ruminate. What does ruminate mean? Rumination is what cows do with their cud. (Sorry, this is where things get weird.)<br>Cows get a mouthful of grass, chew it up, swallow it, throw it back up in their mouths, chew it some more, swallow it again, throw it back up into their mouths again, chew it some more, swallow it again, throw it back up again, chew it more, swallow it again. They do this over and over and over. That is what it means to ruminate.<br>That is the exact idea behind the word meditate. Meditating is taking a thought—in our case a Bible verse or a declaration based on God’s Word—and chewing on it, then swallowing it, then bringing it back to mind and chewing on it some more. Then we swallow it again, then bring it back to mind and chew on it more. We do that over and over and over. We aren’t talking about casual Bible reading; we mean repeatedly taking in every word, the meaning, and the context.
<empty-block/>
Why? Well, why do cows ruminate on their cud? Because it allows them to get the maximum amount of nutrition out of the grass.<br>Why do we meditate on God’s truth and God’s love and God’s great deeds? One reason is because it allows us to get the maximum amount of spiritual nutrition out of our godly thoughts.<br>There’s another reason: repetition is the reason for ruts.
<empty-block/>
Repetition is the reason for ruts.<br>This is why our spiritual enemy has been whispering the same lies to us repeatedly our entire lives. He knows that the more often we think a thought, the more likely we are to believe it, and the more likely it is for the lie to become a rut we get stuck in.
<empty-block/>
You have been told lies over and over, and you now need to tell yourself the truth over and over. Meditate, chew, ruminate, swallow, repeat. As Napoleon Hill said, “Any idea, plan, or purpose may be placed in the mind by repetition of thought.” Repetition is what created the old rut. Repetition is what will create the new trench.<br>Write it, think it, confess it until you believe it.<br>Do this as early as possible each morning. What we are thinking about now influences what we think about next. So what you think about first thing in the morning is the first domino to fall, impacting your thoughts for the rest of the day
<empty-block/>
We may need some new words, but the word I want you to understand now is an actual word: automaticity. Automaticity is the ability to do things without thinking about what you are doing. When repetition allows an action to become unconscious, automatic.<br>When you take a shower, you don’t wonder, What part of me should I wash first? How do I wash my hair? There are so many things to think about. No, you get in the shower and do everything you need to do without thinking. While one part of your brain is taking care of cleaning you up, another part is thinking about the day to come or the day you just had. Automaticity.<br>But automaticity is also why you keep doing things you don’t want to do. Repetition has led to negative, harmful things becoming automatic.<br>The goal of meditating on God’s Word and on our declarations is automaticity. We want to fall into the new trench, which will lead us into the right thoughts and actions. Automatically. An old quote states, “Watch your thoughts, they become your words; watch your words, they become your actions; watch your actions, they become your habits; watch your habits, they become your character; watch your character, it becomes your destiny.” The journey to your destiny starts with your thoughts. The right thoughts lead to the right life. Automatically.<br>Zig Ziglar said, “Repetition is the mother of learning and the father of action, which makes it the architect of accomplishment.
<empty-block/>
Suddenly my temporary financial tax hit just went away. I realized in a visceral way what I already knew in my head: that my security is not in money but in God alone. More money doesn’t give me more peace; more trust in God’s goodness does. That’s exactly what happened as I sat there reading the book; I was flooded with peace.
<empty-block/>
TODAY’S EXERCISE IS STRAIGHTFORWARD: CHOOSE A verse or passage, possibly one you found for a truth in exercise 5, and practice ruminating and meditating as I taught you in this chapter.<br>A few helpful suggestions for this process are:<br>Look intently at each word and phrase, one at a time. Don’t make any assumptions or skip a single word. Each one is important to the overall meaning for you.<br>Type your Scripture reference into your search engine and look for online Bible commentaries. Read what some of the great theologians have had to say about the meanings of the Hebrew or Greek words used in your verse or passage. This level of personal study can bring new meaning and connotation as you work to apply the truth in your life.<br>Ask God, the author of the Word, to speak to your heart about anything specific he might want to say to you through your verse or passage.
<empty-block/>
Trust in the LORD with all your heart,<br>and do not lean on your own<br>understanding.<br>In all your ways acknowledge him,<br>and he will make straight your paths.<br>— PROVERBS 3: 5–6 ESV
<empty-block/>
You cannot defeat an enemy you cannot define. Ask probing questions to explore why you think what you think.
<empty-block/>
being in control is an illusion.
<empty-block/>
No matter how hard you try, you cannot control what’s happened in the past or what will happen in the future. That’s bad news, but there is good news.
<empty-block/>
You cannot control what’s happened or what will happen, but you can control how you perceive it.<br>Social psychologists have a name for taking control of how we perceive things. They call it cognitive reframing.6 It’s when we learn to identify and correct irrational thinking. We could say this happens when we unbias our bias.
<empty-block/>
Our frame is how we view things. It’s the cognitive bias through which we look at and interpret what’s happening. Reframing is when we decide we are not going to hang on to old perceptions that have worked against us. We are going to choose a different, more godly, more productive way of thinking.
<empty-block/>
Experts in the psychotherapeutic world share steps that help us to reframe, to take control of our thoughts and overcome our cognitive bias, such as:
<empty-block/>
Stay calm. If you react, you will probably react the way you’ve always reacted.<br>Identify the situation. What exactly, and truly, is happening?<br>Identify your automatic thoughts. If something at my house breaks and I know it will be an expensive repair, my automatic response is to panic just a little bit. But while I cannot control what breaks, I can control how I perceive it. So instead of just thinking my automatic thought, I identify that thought. I can take it captive and make it obedient to Christ. Then I take an additional step:<br>Find objective supportive evidence. I want to deal in reality, and so I search for objective data on which to base my thinking, such as: Things are going to break. They always do eventually. That’s why you have an emergency fund. Just call someone to get it fixed. There is no reason to freak out.
<empty-block/>
You can take these same steps. You cannot control what happens to you, but you can control how you frame it.
<empty-block/>
You cannot control what happens to you, but you can control how you frame it.
<empty-block/>
The third tool to change your thinking is the Reframe Principle: Reframe your mind, restore your perspective. (The first tool is the Replacement Principle: Remove the lies, replace with truth. The second tool is the Rewire Principle: Rewire your brain, renew your mind.) Reframing has changed my thinking and changed my life.<br>Reframing your past—and preframing your future—will change your life
<empty-block/>
We need to go back and rewrite the narrative we have been telling ourselves.<br>So how do we reframe our past?<br>We thank God for what he didn’t do.<br>We look for God’s goodness.<br>This is the shortest chapter in the book, but it might be one of the most powerful. Here’s why: it will reframe your past. Thanking God for what he’s done is easy for most of us. But I’ve learned to also thank God for what he didn’t do.
<empty-block/>
Sometimes we need to thank God for what he didn’t do. Developing that discipline helps us reframe our past.
<empty-block/>
THINK BACK THROUGH YOUR LIFE ON YOUR PAST HOPES, dreams, desires, and relationships. Think through some what-ifs in a positive, good way. See if you can come up with situations, much like the two personal examples I gave you, from your life in which God didn’t answer your prayer or allow your dreams to come true. See these situations through the filter that he knew all along what was best for you. This can be an amazing and eye-opening glimpse into the deep love your heavenly Father has for you
<empty-block/>
You will always find what you are looking for.<br>Think about the difference between a vulture and a hummingbird.<br>Vultures soar high in the sky, searching. What does a vulture find? Dead things. The ugly, oversized bird doesn’t stop until he finds lifeless roadkill. Vultures can sniff out a dead critter from more than a mile away and have been known to cruise thirty to fifty miles in search of rotting food.<br>Now contrast the vulture to the tiny hummingbird. With wings flapping twenty beats a second, this small bird finds what? Not dead, disgusting, rancid meat but sweet, life-giving nectar.<br>Daily, each bird finds what it is looking for.<br>The same is true for you. You will always find what you are looking for.<br>When we reframe what happened in our yesterdays, that changes our todays. We are able to experience life without the old, negative cognitive bias and start seeing through the lens of God’s goodness
<empty-block/>
Just as we can reframe, we can also preframe.<br>Preframing is choosing how I will view something before it happens. Instead of getting there and letting my old way of looking at things take over, leading me to interpret what might be positive as negative, I proactively choose the frame I will use to evaluate my experience.
<empty-block/>
Maybe you have a cognitive bias constructed by other people. You accepted what they told you as truth, and even though it was a lie, ever since it has affected your life as if it were true.
<empty-block/>
From that day on I have told myself, Groeschel, you are a pressure player. You are at your best when things are at their worst. In those moments, your God is for you and your God is with you.
<empty-block/>
My declaration for tennis became one for pressure situations in life. In leadership, the tougher the circumstances, the more I want to be involved. If there’s a spiritual situation, if someone is about to die who doesn’t know Christ, let me be the one to have the conversation. Why? I have preframed the outcome. I will walk into it knowing that my God is for me and with me. I will not play to lose. I will play to win. I am a pressure player. I rise to the occasion.
<empty-block/>
That’s not just what I tell myself. That’s how I live and handle those tough moments. Because I can’t control what happens to me. But I can control how I frame it. And the way I frame it will dictate how I respond and behave.
<empty-block/>
How do you need to preframe your future?<br>What situations do you know you will be walking into?<br>What would be the most positive, life-building, God-honoring, mutually edifying way for you to approach that moment?<br>Preframe it. With God’s help you can choose the frame through which you will step into that situation
<empty-block/>
Let’s say you wake up knowing you are facing an overwhelmingly busy day. Instead of complaining about how hard it will be, preframe it with a more positive, godly perspective. Tell yourself, Today I get to experience God’s strength when I am weak. He gives me everything I need to do what he’s called me to do. Rather than a busy, bad day, I’m going to have a positive, productive one
<empty-block/>
If you are nervous about the challenging conversation you need to have with a friend, try to preframe it with faith. Instead of imagining a blowup, thank God ahead of time for your friend and for giving you the words to say. Decide you are going to do the right thing and trust God with the results.
<empty-block/>
Let’s say you have an intimidating doctor’s appointment later in the week. Your fears might be overwhelming as you forecast the worst possible outcome. Instead choose a different frame for your future. Believe God has heard your prayers and that you will hear good news from the doctor. And if you don’t, remind yourself that God is always good. Collaterally good. No matter what you face, he will be with you. You can’t control what happens, but you can control how you frame it.
<empty-block/>
Know that there’s a different way to look at the world. We can choose to make our cognitive bias the goodness of God. We can look at our circumstances through the lens of his mercy and grace. There is not a moment when we have been forsaken or forgotten.<br>We can’t control what happens to us, but we can control how we frame the outcome, even before it happens.
<empty-block/>
In your life, is there a circumstance or a relationship that you know God allowed you to begin to see from a different perspective, so that you changed your attitude from negative to positive, from harmful to healthy? What happened to change your mindset?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>Recalling my personal example, ask yourself, “What in my life right now is the Monday—the relationship or circumstance in which I struggle to see anything positive or good?” Write it out.<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>What is one practical step you could take to change your mind about this situation?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>What would you want to see God do to change this situation?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>What would be the most positive, life-building, God-honoring, mutually edifying way for you to approach this situation?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>YOU CAN USE THIS EXERCISE TO CONTINUE TO REFRAME circumstances in your life and open doors for God to give you a new perspective. Remember, you can’t control what happens to you, but you can control how you frame it. And the way you frame it will dictate how you respond and behave
<empty-block/>
What perceived threats cause you to panic? Not being able to control your future?
<empty-block/>
The thought that you might fail?
<empty-block/>
We’ve said that your life will always move in the direction of your strongest thoughts. That’s good news if you are thinking on things that are noble, right, pure, lovely, admirable, excellent, or praiseworthy. It’s bad news if you are thinking on things that are dishonorable, false, ugly, anxious, unjust, fearful, or just plain irrational. Our runaway negative thoughts can spiral out of control and lead our lives in the wrong direction.
<empty-block/>
So why do we panic?<br>There is a little, almond-shaped part of our brains called the amygdala. The amygdala is responsible for emotions and survival instincts. When you’re afraid, the amygdala lights up like a pinball machine, producing a fight-or-flight response. The amygdala deploys a tsunami of adrenaline, preparing the body for action.<br>That’s a good thing if you are hiking a trail and come across a poisonous snake poised to strike. You need to get out of its way quickly. The amygdala did its job.
<empty-block/>
It’s also a good thing if you are driving and suddenly a cow comes flying at your windshield. (I live in Oklahoma, where we average fifty-two tornados a year and have lots of farms, so yes, this could happen.) You must react immediately, choosing either to fight the cow (good luck with that!) or to take flight from the cow (my suggestion). When you swerve and the cow soars by, you have your amygdala to thank for staying alive.<br>The problem is that the amygdala is not objective. The way it responds to a hurtling cow is the same way it responds to a hurtful conversation. The way it responds to a noise letting you know a burglar has broken into your house is the same way it responds to a notification letting you know your bank account is overdrawn
<empty-block/>
If you are confronted with an angry bovine or an aggressive burglar, you need the adrenaline to spark your body into action. If you are facing a disappointing text or a disagreeable spouse, you do not need the adrenaline, and it will just loiter in your body, acting as an unwanted hype man. You will feel stressed, agitated, on edge. Can you spell P-A-N-I-C?
<empty-block/>
What about you? Be gut-level honest. What makes you panic?<br>Whatever that is, your amygdala, which in true fight-or-flight situations is your best friend, is also going to work against you. But wait. You have another portion of your brain that will help your slightly confused amygdala: your prefrontal cortex. The prefrontal cortex is the logical part of the brain
<empty-block/>
Think of your amygdala as your twitchy, amped-up, overcaffeinated, overstimulated, always-on-edge, high-blood-pressure cousin. Think of your prefrontal cortex as your thoughtful, levelheaded, realistic, even-tempered uncle with a law degree.
<empty-block/>
God gave you the logical part of your brain to keep the emotional part of your brain in check.
<empty-block/>
Despite the help of our prefrontal cortex buddy, we can spend a lot of our time allowing our problems to cause us to panic. What we crave is peace. So what do we do? How do we not plunge into panic and instead find a pathway from problems to peace? I’m so glad you asked. The good news is that our answer is only a prayer away.
<empty-block/>
What causes us to panic?<br>For me, it’s the presence of problems. Typically, it’s not just one problem. We start getting into I’m losing it and I really need a hug territory when it’s problems—plural. Multiple problems. You start feeling like you’re playing whack-a-mole. You can handle an issue, but when they keep coming, you get to a point where you’ve had enough. That’s when we need to master our minds, fix our thoughts, and worship our God.
<empty-block/>
Recognizing God’s presence will give you peace when you have cause for panic
<empty-block/>
Why does our God whisper?<br>He whispers because he is so close.<br>And he whispers to draw us close.<br>Think about it: When you are sitting next to a loved one and they whisper in your ear, what do you do? You lean into them. And you listen closely.<br>When we’re hurting, when we’re afraid, when we’re overwhelmed, we may shout up to the heavens and wait for God to shout back. We wish for an audible voice. We don’t understand why God doesn’t speak loudly to us, commanding our attention in some obvious way. But why doesn’t he do this? Why don’t you hear him? Perhaps God wants you to slow down, to be still, to listen carefully for his soft, comforting, quiet voice.<br>Because you have to get quiet and listen intently. God whispers because he is close and because he desires to draw you close. Lean in and listen
<empty-block/>
When you’ve had enough, God is enough.
<empty-block/>
I started meeting with a performance psychologist who helped me remember things I knew but had been ignoring
<empty-block/>
My experience plus God’s presence is enough
<empty-block/>
Yes, the presence of problems is tempting you to panic. But don’t ignore the presence of God. God is bigger than your problems. The most essential thing for your mind is for your mind to stay mindful about the presence of God.
<empty-block/>
The Lord is close.<br>He is near.<br>He will never leave me nor forsake me.<br>Nothing can separate me from his love.<br>He is always with me. (He’s with me right now as I read this book.)<br>I am never alone, and he is enough for me.<br>His strength sustains me.<br>He watches over me, and he guides me with his loving eye upon me.<br>God is close, and he wants to draw me close.<br>I will lean into him and listen for his whisper.
<empty-block/>
What circumstances or dynamics exist in your life right now that regularly create panic for you?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>Why do you think these specific situations create panic in you?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>Is there any place in your life right now where you would say you have had enough and are at the end of your rope? Write it out.<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>What can you do to lean in and hear God’s whisper among all the wind, fire, and earthquakes going on around you now in this circumstance?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>Would talking to a counselor, pastor, or close friend help you get to a better place with this issue? If so, who?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>GO BACK TO THE END OF THE CHAPTER AND READ OUT loud the declaration statements that I gave you. God is near. He is listening.
<empty-block/>
If you forget God is there, you won’t talk to him.
<empty-block/>
WHY IS BEING MINDFUL OF GOD’S PRESENCE SO CRITICAL?
<empty-block/>
when we realize God is there, we realize we can talk to him. When things are bad, instead of just feeling down, we look up. We look up and find a God who loves us and has the power to help. We need to practice God’s presence—habitually reminding ourselves that God is with us—so we’ll be persistent in prayer.<br>Remember Paul’s prescription in Philippians 4 for panic-inducing circumstances? “Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God” (v. 6).
<empty-block/>
Let this game-changing truth sink in:<br>If it’s big enough to worry about, then it’s big enough to pray about.<br>If it’s on your mind, then it’s on God’s heart
<empty-block/>
Something I’ve learned from years of being a pastor is that a lot of people aren’t sure how to pray.<br>Do I address God as my omnipotent Creator?<br>Is praying in King James language mandatory?<br>Do I have to sign off with the whole “In Jesus’ name” part?<br>Is the word harken required? I hope not, because I’m not sure I know what harken means.
<empty-block/>
Paul wrote, “Present your requests to God,” which may sound a little formal, but it’s not. Another way of translating Paul’s words is, “Let your needs be known.” When you’ve had enough and your problems are tempting you to panic, how should you pray? Just let your needs be known.
<empty-block/>
Each of my kids is creative in how he or she asks, because they are not trying to do it “the right way”; they’re just being themselves. God doesn’t want you to do it “the right way” either. He wants you to be yourself, just like he made you. Let your needs be known in the way that feels right to you. Pray your way.<br>You might talk your prayers, yell your prayers, sing or journal them. You might pray long or you might pray short; just make sure you pray. There is no perfect way. Just pray.<br>When you pray, ask with confidence. I’m a dad, and I like it when my children need me. God is your perfect heavenly Father, and he loves it when you come to him and let your needs be known
<empty-block/>
Peter told us that God invites us to go to him. “Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time. Cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you” (1 Peter 5:6–7)
<empty-block/>
The strategy was prayer. I decided to start tithing my study time in prayer.
<empty-block/>
Decades of tithing has taught me that 90 percent of what I have, with God’s blessing, is way more than 100 percent without God’s blessing.<br>I am now applying that principle to preaching. Instead of working harder, I’m praying harder. Instead of working longer, I’m praying longer. The strategy is based on my faith that if I give 90 percent of my work time to preparing and 10 percent to praying, I can get more done than I would if I worked for 100 percent of that time.
<empty-block/>
Prayer works. Prayer changes things. Perhaps more important, prayer changes you. Prayer changes your brain.
<empty-block/>
Our brains are constantly evolving. Neurologists call the process neuroplasticity. The idea is that we can sculpt our brain just as we can sculpt our muscles with some strategic time spent at the gym. Your brain is rewiring itself all the time by creating those new neural pathways. Each time you think a thought, it’s easier to think that thought again. That’s good news if you’re thinking godly thoughts. It’s not good news if you’ve been conditioned to run from blue vans.
<empty-block/>
He writes, in scholarly articles and in books like How God Changes Your Brain, that prayer is like a physical workout for the brain and changes its chemistry.<br>Think about that. Not only does prayer touch the heart of God, but prayer changes the chemistry of your brain!
<empty-block/>
Dr. Leaf writes, “It has been found that twelve minutes of daily focused prayer over an eight-week period can change the brain to such an extent that it can be measured on a brain scan. This type of prayer increases activity in brain areas associated with social interaction, compassion, and sensitivity to others. It also increases frontal lobe activity as focus and intentionality increase.”8<br>Your life is always moving in the direction of your strongest thoughts. Worrying and toxic thinking will change your brain and move your life in a direction you don’t want to go. Prayer changes your brain and moves your life in a positive direction.
<empty-block/>
Prayer literally renews our mind, leading us to God’s peace and understanding. “And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:7).
<empty-block/>
So why do we panic? It’s that obnoxious amygdala. Scientists have a name for what happens to us, first coined by Daniel Goleman in his book Emotional Intelligence: an amygdala hijack. The amygdala gets a peek at what’s going on out there and has an immediate, emotional, and overwhelming response, often a disproportionately excessive reaction. Blue van! Run! Now!<br>How do you avoid becoming a hostage to your amygdala? How do you counter its negative impact and not allow it to bully you into a panic?<br>You pray.
<empty-block/>
I know, I get it, that sounds like something pastors are supposed to say, but we can find peace through prayer! We can control our brains through prayer! It is something pastors say but also something scientists say. Another one of Dr. Andrew Newberg’s findings startled the scientific community. He discovered that prayer can regulate and decrease the amygdala’s fight-or-flight response.9<br>A scientist would call what happens to us when we panic, worry, and freak out an amygdala hijack. Paul, coming from a spiritual perspective, described this as sinful thinking. What is that?<br>Sinful thinking is not trusting the promises and power of God.<br>Prayer is choosing to trust the promises and power of God.<br>Prayer is deciding to turn to and surrender our feelings and control of our lives to God, trusting his promises and power. That’s what we’re going to do. We are going to pray in faith.<br>Paul wrote, “Those who are dominated by the sinful nature think about sinful things, but those who are controlled by the Holy Spirit think about things that please the Spirit. So letting your sinful nature control your mind leads to death. But letting the Spirit control your mind leads to life and peace” (Rom. 8:5–6 NLT)
<empty-block/>
If we let our natural, human nature take over, we will be led by runaway negative thoughts that spiral out of control and lead us in the wrong direction. If we let the Spirit take over, we will be led to life and peace.<br>This is why it is critical that we take every thought captive. With the power of the Holy Spirit, we are going to prayerfully employ the prefrontal cortex as a burly, thuggish bouncer standing outside the door of our minds, attentively checking IDs and not allowing in any thought that doesn’t meet the criteria of being true, noble, right, lovely, admirable, excellent, or praiseworthy. If a thought is inconsistent with God’s Word, we will wrestle it to the ground and make it obedient to Christ. If a thought sets itself up against the knowledge of God, we will demolish it with divine power, for we will not be dominated by dark thoughts that are self-destructive and displeasing to God
<empty-block/>
THE GOD BOX<br><br>Through prayer and the power of God, we take every thought captive. Let me give you a visual way of thinking about this. I want you to actually do this.<br>Get a box. It doesn’t have to be fancy or big: a small Amazon box or a shoebox. Now write, “God” on the box.<br>Every time you have a worry, burden, temptation, or runaway crazy thought, write it down on a slip of paper. You might write:<br>I’m afraid I’m going to get fired.<br>My seventeen-year-old son worries me sick.<br>I want to get on my phone and go to websites or social media I know I shouldn’t.<br>I can’t pay all these bills.
<empty-block/>
What’s going to happen with my mother?<br>I want to smoke so bad.<br>I’m never going to change.<br>I’m angry with my spouse constantly.<br>Write them down and put them in your God box. When you do, pray, “God, I am trusting you with this. I know you are in control. I know you are bigger than this. This is not a thought I want to think, so I am giving this to you.”<br>Once you pray and put the problem in the box, go on with your life.<br>From that point on, if you decide you want to worry about whatever it was, go to the God box, take it out, and tell God, “I don’t trust you with this. I am going to take it back from you.”<br>When you read that last sentence, you probably thought, I could never say that to God, but every time we worry or panic, that is what we’re saying to God.<br>That is not how we want to live, and we don’t need to live that way. Paul told us, “The Lord is near,” so we need to practice God’s presence, so we’ll be persistent in prayer. Peter told us we can cast all our cares on God, because he cares for us. Our thoughts seek to betray us, but we know:<br>If it’s big enough to worry about, it’s big enough to pray about.<br>If it’s on your mind, it’s on God’s heart.<br>“Let us then approach God’s throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need” (Heb. 4:16
<empty-block/>
First, they were praising God for the who, not the what.<br>They were bloody and bound up in prison. If you had asked them, “What are you praising God for?” I don’t think there was any what that they could point to. Nothing good was happening, but their God was still good. They weren’t praising God for the what. They were praising him for the who. You can do that too
<empty-block/>
Your circumstances may be bad, but your God is still good. He is near, his promises are still true, his love still unconditional, his grace still amazing, his timing still perfect. You may not like the what of what’s going on, but you can still praise God for the who of who he is.
<empty-block/>
Second, they were praising God before the provision.<br>So often we hold off on praising God until he provides what we want. Think about that. Doesn’t it sound like an entitled little snot-nosed kid? I won’t be grateful until I get exactly what I want. We are better than that and, more important, God deserves better. Paul and Silas praised God before he answered their prayers or changed their circumstances. That’s the kind of person I want to be.
<empty-block/>
Third, they were praising God and then he showed up.<br>Paul and Silas were worshiping God in the middle of the night and—boom!—God showed up. “Suddenly, there was a massive earthquake, and the prison was shaken to its foundations. All the doors immediately flew open, and the chains of every prisoner fell off!” (Acts 16:26 NLT).<br>They did not praise God because he showed up; God showed up because they praised him.<br>I wonder if it’s possible that you’ve been praying for God to show up for you in some way, thinking you’ll be grateful and praise him when he does, while God is waiting for you to be grateful and praise him, and won’t show up until you do
<empty-block/>
THE EXERCISE FOR THIS CHAPTER IS SIMPLY TO DO EXACTLY what I recommended in the section called “The God Box.”<br>Get a box, write down your problems, pray about them, and put them inside. I get that doing this may feel a little strange at first, but there is just something about the symbolism and the action of placing your problems in the box, giving them to God. And then, if you choose to worry, having to take them back out and confess your struggle to him. What if this simple exercise changes your prayer life and what God does in your life? That would be worth any effort, right?
<empty-block/>
Praising God is all about perspective. A change of perspective leads us to praise God, and praising God changes our perspective.
<empty-block/>
Rejoice Principle: Revive your soul, reclaim your life. I stay mindful of God’s presence; I praise him.<br>When I’ve had enough, I pray, putting my concerns in my God box.<br>I praise God—for the who, not the what—even when I don’t want to.<br>And I sense my perspective changing.
<empty-block/>
While everything seemed negative, Paul chose to see the positive. Paul was looking not at it but through it. He was seeing the image God wanted him to see that others couldn’t. That’s why, as he continued the letter, he wrote, “The Lord is near” (Phil. 4:5) and, “Do not be anxious about anything” (v. 6) and, “The peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus” (v. 7). It’s why he could tell his readers, “Rejoice in the Lord always” (v. 4).<br>How could he praise God in jail? Perspective. It’s not about prison but about perspective.
<empty-block/>
Because I was in panic mode, I looked at him suspiciously.<br>He said, “Physically, you’re in really great shape. Your diet is almost flawless. You’re not abusing any kind of substances. You’re ridiculously in love with your wife. You have a great relationship with your kids. You’re not missing family events. You’ve got incredible relationships around you, a lot of people who really care about you.”<br>I nodded. Because he was right.<br>The counselor continued. “There are so many things that are right. The reason you’re panicking is because you’re just looking at what’s wrong. Don’t forget to also look at what’s right.”<br>He nailed it. I was looking at, not through. I was staring at my problems, having lost perspective on all the ways God had blessed my life. I left the counselor’s office praising God.
<empty-block/>
But don’t forget to look through. Look at the whole picture. Do you have family? Friends? A church? Your health? A home? Some food in the fridge? Some money in the bank? Your faith?<br>Don’t just look at what’s wrong. Look at what’s right. Maybe take a minute to write down all the good things. Literally count your blessings and thank God for them.<br>A change of perspective leads us to praise God.<br>And praising God changes our perspective
<empty-block/>
Praising God changes our perspective.<br>And praising God changes our brains.<br>That’s been verified too.
<empty-block/>
As we near the end of our journey, I hope you walk away understanding that your thinking determines so much. Your life always moves in the direction of your strongest thoughts. What consumes your mind controls your life.<br>I also hope you remember that, unfortunately, your mind is under attack.<br>Just after encouraging us to humble ourselves and cast all our anxiety on God, Peter wrote, “Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour” (1 Peter 5:8).<br>Peter said, “Be alert.” Don’t drop your guard! Why? You have an enemy, the devil, and he is looking for someone to devour. The devil is always coming after you, he is always swinging, and so you always have to keep your hands up.<br>How do we do that?<br>Remember what Paul wrote: “Do not be anxious about anything, but in every situation, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God. And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4:6–7).<br>Paul calls for us to make petitions and offer thanksgiving. Or we could say, prayer and praise. The promise is, if we do that, God will guard our minds. His peace will guard our minds.<br>Peace guards your heart and your mind.<br>Peace is preceded by prayer and praise.<br>In a fight, you need to keep both hands up to protect yourself. Think of prayer as one hand and praise as the other. We need to keep both hands raised.<br>When someone raises both hands, that can be to surrender or to celebrate a victory. When we raise both hands to God, it is both—surrendering to God and fully anticipating the victory that is already ours, because we know we are more than conquerors though him who loves us.<br>The devil’s target is your mind. His weapon is his lies. He will never stop trying to deceive you. There are lies he’s been telling you your entire life. Right now he’s seeking out opportunities to tell you new lies. He is probably taking a swing at you as you read this, and he will again in the next few minutes, hours, days, and weeks.<br>What do we do?<br>We keep our guard up.<br>We go to God with prayer, and we go to God with praise.<br>Surrender and victory
<empty-block/>
What circumstance or relationship in your life right now do you need to stop looking at and instead look through to see what God is doing?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>In what circumstance or relationship in your life right now do you need to look at what’s right instead of seeing only what’s wrong?<br>\[Your Notes\]<br>In what circumstance or relationship in your life right now have you dropped your guard and know you need to raise both hands to God, both surrendering to him and fully anticipating the victory?<br>\[Your Notes\]
<empty-block/>
I continue to create new trenches of truth to replace my old ruts so they will give me thought pathways leading to life and peace.
<empty-block/>
You will use the four tools God has given us to fix our thoughts and win the war in our minds: (1) the Replacement Principle, (2) the Rewire Principle, (3) the Reframe Principle, and (4) the Rejoice Principle.<br><br>You will remove the lie and replace it with truth. We know we have an enemy who is seeking to destroy us. His weapon is the lie. Our weakness is believing lies, and if we believe a lie, it will affect our lives as if it were true.<br>The problem is that we don’t realize that the lies we believe are lies. If we knew, we wouldn’t believe them. Hopefully, the lies you need to defeat are now clear to you.<br><br>You will create new trenches of truth. Our brains have neural pathways—mental ruts we created through repeatedly thinking the same thoughts—which trigger our automatic response to external stimuli. To stop a behavior, we need to remove the lie behind it and replace the neural pathway. We dig truth trenches.<br>How?<br>You renew your mind with God’s truth. As you internalize Bible verses, they will become your new way of thinking and responding.<br>You will form personal declarations, writing them, thinking them, and confessing them until you believe them. These declarations of God’s truth about you will become your new mental pathways to life and peace.<br><br>You will reframe and preframe. We cannot control what happens to us, but we can control how we perceive it. We all have cognitive biases that cause us to see things in ways that do not reflect reality. But we have the power to do cognitive reframing, changing how we view the past and the future.<br><br>You will change your perspective through prayer and praise. It’s easy to feel overwhelmed by everything that is happening, but when we’ve had enough, God is enough.<br>Not only is God enough; God is near. We stay mindful of his presence. When we do, it leads us to pray. Instead of worrying, we put all our fears in our God box, trusting his love and provision for us. Praying changes our brain, as does praising God. We praise him for the who of who he is, even if the what is not what we want. As we praise God, he shows up and gives us peace of mind
<empty-block/>
You are not controlled by fear.<br>You are not stuck.<br>You are not a slave to your habits.<br>You are not a prisoner to your addictions.<br>You are not a victim.<br>You are not failing.<br>You are not unlikable.<br>You are not unworthy of love.<br>You are not your past.<br>You are not what you did.<br>You are not what someone else did to you.<br>You are not who others say you are.<br>You are not who your unhealthy thoughts say you are.<br>You are not done.<br>You. Are. Who. God. Says. You. Are.<br>Because of Christ:<br>You are loved.<br>You are forgiven.<br>You are healed.<br>You are new.<br>You are redeemed.<br>You are free.<br>You are blessed.<br>You are strong and mighty.<br>You are chosen.<br>You are empowered.<br>You are a weapon of righteousness in a world of darkness
<empty-block/>
Second Corinthians 10:3–5 became his strongest weapon in the battle. Paul writes, “For though we live in the world, we do not wage war as the world does. The weapons we fight with are not the weapons of the world. On the contrary, they have divine power to demolish strongholds. We demolish arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge of God, and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to Christ.”<br>That is exactly what Craig did. He started to name and write down any thought that is inconsistent with God’s truth. He captured all the wrong thoughts, discouraging voices, and hurtful lies that echoed in his mind.<br>Then, one by one, Craig found Bible verses that corrected the harmful thoughts with encouraging spiritual truths.<br>That’s when the positive changes started happening.<br>Before long, Craig had created a list of positive, faith-filled spiritual declarations designed to renew his mind with truth. By meditating on truth, Craig deprogrammed his negative and fearful thinking. His mind was being renewed and his faith was strengthening. I saw his attitude and communication change
<empty-block/>
BIBLE VERSES FOR WINNING THE WAR
<empty-block/>
</content>
</page>