---
title: Hearing God
author: Dallas Willard
source_url: https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb55816487d4f773b6b10797
date_added: 2026-05-30
date_published: unknown
type: Book-highlights
tags: ["topic-vault", "readwise-vault"]
referenced_by_topics: ["spiritual formation"]
---

Here is the result of "view" for the Page with URL https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb55816487d4f773b6b10797 as of 2026-01-02T04:04:44.889Z:
<page url="https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb55816487d4f773b6b10797" icon="https://img1.od-cdn.com/ImageType-100/6689-1/{5AE1DF9A-0D7A-4F9C-8D16-3E056B26FC85}Img100.jpg">
<ancestor-path>
<parent-data-source url="collection://5b54c90e-5328-4c1a-8679-469de2932b1b" name="Library"/>
<ancestor-2-database url="https://www.notion.so/13ad939f560c414b825d45ac8c2a2118" title=""/>
<ancestor-3-page url="https://www.notion.so/92bfa9ac85f3481ab886518cb4f96498" title="readwise"/>
<ancestor-4-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580cab9f0c5a37ff8f1c6" title=""/>
<ancestor-5-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb5580809ca5cafcb22c1274" title=""/>
<ancestor-6-page url="https://www.notion.so/32330c00cb55809c8e5fd66f56d28031" title="Hunter Wilson"/>
</ancestor-path>
<properties>
{"Author":"Dallas Willard","Category":"Books","Document Notes":"","Full Title":"Hearing God","Highlights":114,"Summary":"","Title":"Hearing God","date:Last Highlighted:is_datetime":0,"date:Last Highlighted:start":"2025-11-30","date:Last Synced:is_datetime":0,"date:Last Synced:start":"2025-11-30","topic vault":["https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb5580c6b2f6f171630c4113"],"url":"https://www.notion.so/2b630c00cb55816487d4f773b6b10797","userDefined:URL":""}
</properties>
<content>
God has created us for intimate friendship with himself—both now and forever. This is the Christian viewpoint. It is made clear throughout the Bible, especially in passages such as Exodus 29:43-46, 33:11; Psalm 23; Isaiah 41:8; John 15:14 and Hebrews 13:5-6. As with all close personal relationships, God can be counted on to speak to each of us when and as it’s appropriate. But what does this really mean? And how does it work in practice? I hope in the following pages to give a clear and workable answer to these questions.
<empty-block/>
We truly live at the mercy of our ideas; this is never more true than with our ideas about God. Those who operate on the wrong information aren’t likely to know the reality of God’s presence in the decisions that shape their lives, and they will miss the constant divine companionship for which their souls were made.
<empty-block/>
When our children, John and Becky, were small, they were often completely in my will as they played happily in the back garden, though I had no preference that they should do the particular things they were doing there or even that they should be in the back garden instead of playing in their rooms or having a snack in the kitchen. Generally we are in God’s will whenever we are leading the kind of life he wants for us. And that leaves a lot of room for initiative on our part, which is essential: our individual initiatives are central to his will for us.
<empty-block/>
a life of free-hearted collaboration with Jesus and his friends in the kingdom of the heavens.
<empty-block/>
Chapter one clarifies the tension in which Christians live, believing that hearing God is very important to our walk with him but at the same time lacking a confident understanding of how it works in practice. Chapter two removes some common misunderstandings about God’s communications with us. Chapter three explains the various ways in which he is with us. Chapter four examines some objections to the very idea of God’s communicating with individuals. Chapter five deals with the various ways in which he communicates and explains and defends the centrality of the “still, small voice.” Chapters six and seven discuss the centrality of God’s speaking—God’s Word—to his creation and to the process of redemption. The Word of God is not foreign to routine reality; it is at the very heart of it. Chapter eight clarifies how we can be sure that we are hearing God. Finally, chapter nine deals with what to do on those occasions, sure to come, when God is not speaking—or at least when we are not hearing him
<empty-block/>
my hope is to leave you with a clear sense of how to live confidently in a personal walk that is complemented by an ongoing conversational relationship with God.
<empty-block/>
For a presentation of the larger picture of life with Jesus Christ in the kingdom of God, of which hearing God is only one part, I refer readers to my books The Spirit of the Disciplines and The Divine Conspiracy.
<empty-block/>
A Paradox About<br>Hearing God
<empty-block/>
The Ongoing Conversation<br>Today I continue to believe that people are meant to live in an ongoing conversation with God, speaking and being spoken to. I believe that this can be abundantly verified in experience when rightly understood. God’s visits to Adam and Eve in the Garden, Enoch’s walks with God and the face-to-face conversations between Moses and Jehovah are all commonly regarded as highly exceptional moments in the religious history of humankind. Aside from their obviously unique historical role, however, they are not meant to be exceptional at all. Rather, they are examples of the normal human life God intended for us: God’s indwelling his people through personal presence and fellowship. Given our basic nature, we live—really live—only through God’s regular speaking in our souls and thus “by every word that comes from of the mouth of God.”
<empty-block/>
Similar doubts and hesitations justifiably trouble those who feel they are spoken to by God. “Why is it,” comedian Lily Tomlin asks, “that when we speak to God we are said to be praying but when God speaks to us we are said to be schizophrenic?” Such a response from ourselves or others to someone’s claim to have heard from God is especially likely today because of the lack of specific teaching and pastoral guidance on such matters.
<empty-block/>
it is well known that people go off into all sorts of errors and become quite unmanageable once God starts “talking” to them.
<empty-block/>
Abiding Includes Conversing
<empty-block/>
On the evening before his crucifixion, Jesus assured his little band of followers that although he was leaving them, he would continue to manifest himself to all who loved him. Judas who was also called Thaddaeus then asked just the right question: How would this manifesting take place? Jesus’ reply was that he and his Father would “come to them and make our home with them” (Jn 14:22-23).<br>Certainly this abiding of the Son and the Father in the faithful heart involves conscious communication or conversation in a manner and a measure our Lord himself considers to be appropriate. It is simply beyond belief that two persons so intimately related as indicated in Jesus’ answer to Thaddaeus would not speak explicitly to one another. The Spirit who inhabits us is not mute, restricting himself to an occasional nudge, a hot flash, a brilliant image or a case of goose bumps.
<empty-block/>
“How could there be a personal relationship, a personal walk with God—or with anyone else—without individualized communication?”<br>Sometimes today it seems that our personal relationship with God is treated as no more than a mere arrangement or understanding that Jesus and his Father have about us. Our personal relationship then only means that each believer has his or her own unique account in heaven, which allows them to draw on the merits of Christ to pay their sin bills. Or possibly it means that God’s general providence for his creation is adequate to provide for each person.<br>But who does not think there should be much more to a personal relationship than that? A mere benefactor, however powerful, kind and thoughtful, is not the same thing as a friend. Jesus says, “I have called you friends” (Jn 15:15) and “Look, I am with you every minute, even to the end of the age” (Mt 28:20, paraphrase; cf. Heb 13:5-6).
<empty-block/>
Wilhelm Hermann, a great theologian of the late nineteenth century, goes so far as to mark the Christian out in terms of a personal communion with God. “We hold a man to be really a Christian when we believe we have ample evidence that God has revealed himself to him in Jesus Christ, and that now the man’s inner life is taking on a new character through his communion with the God who is thus manifest.”3Spiritual formation into Christlikeness—true change of character—comes from living in relationship to God.
<empty-block/>
Receiving guidance from God actually serves as the basis of authority for our teachers and leaders. Rarely do people profess to teach and lead the people of God on the basis of their education, natural talents and denominational connections alone. Authority in spiritual leadership derives from a life in the Spirit, from the leader’s personal encounter and ongoing relationship with God.
<empty-block/>
The paradox about hearing God’s voice must, then, be resolved and removed by providing believers with a clear understanding and a confident, practical orientation toward God’s way of guiding us and communicating with us, which is the aim of the chapters that follow. But before we can even begin working on this task, there are three general problem areas that must be briefly addressed.
<empty-block/>
First, we need to understand that God’s communications come to us in many forms
<empty-block/>
Second, we may have the wrong motives for seeking to hear from God.
<empty-block/>
We all in some measure share in the general human anxiety about the future. By nature we live in the future, constantly hurled into it whether we like it or not. Knowing what we will meet there is a condition of our being prepared to deal with it—or so it would seem from the human point of view.
<empty-block/>
I fear that many people seek to hear God solely as a device for obtaining their own safety, comfort and sense of being righteous. For those who busy themselves to know the will of God, however, it is still
<empty-block/>
true that “those who want to save their life will lose it” (Mt 16:25). My extreme preoccupation with knowing God’s will for me may only indicate, contrary to what is often thought, that I am overconcerned with myself, not a Christlike interest in the well-being of others or in the glory of God.
<empty-block/>
Frederick B. Meyer writes, “So long as there is some thought of personal advantage, some idea of acquiring the praise and commendation of men, some aim of self-aggrandizement, it will be simply impossible to find out God’s purpose concerning us.”8 Nothing will go right in our effort to hear God if this false motivation is its foundation. God simply will not cooperate. We must discover a different type of motivation for knowing God’s will and listening to his voice.
<empty-block/>
Closely aligned to wanting to hear God only to know the future, some people want to have God’s distinct instructions so they will not have to be responsible for their actions. But responsibility and initiative are the heart of our relationship with God. We are not robots, and he does not work with robots.
<empty-block/>
Third, misconceiving the nature of our heavenly Father and of his intent for us creates a truly overwhelming problem to block our understanding of God’s communication with us as his redeemed children and friends. From this then comes a further misunderstanding of what the church, his redemptive community, is to be like and especially of how authority works in the kingdom of the heavens. Indeed, all human troubles come from thinking of God wrongly, which then means, thinking about ourselves wrongly.
<empty-block/>
Obviously God must guide us in a way that will develop spontaneity in us. The development of character, rather than direction in this, that, and the other matter, must be the primary purpose of the Father. He will guide us, but he won’t override us. That fact should make us use with caution the method of sitting down with a pencil and a blank sheet of paper to write down the instructions dictated by God for the day. Suppose a parent would dictate to the child minutely everything he is to do during the day. The child would be stunted under that regime. The parent must guide in such a manner, and to the degree, that autonomous character, capable of making right decisions for itself, is produced. God does the same.9
<empty-block/>
A Conversational Relationship<br>The ideal for hearing from God is finally determined by who God is, what kind of beings we are and what a personal relationship between ourselves and God should be like. Our failure to hear God has its deepest roots in a failure to understand, accept and grow into a conversational relationship with God, the sort of relationship suited to friends who are mature personalities in a shared enterprise, no matter how different they may be in other respects.
<empty-block/>
Guidelines for<br>Hearing from God
<empty-block/>
You may have seen the film The Stepford Wives.1 It is the story of a couple, probably in their early or mid-thirties, who move into the upper-middle-class community of Stepford, where the men are mostly workers in high-tech industries and businesses, and the women stay at home.<br>The woman in the couple soon notices that most of the other Stepford wives uniformly exhibit very strange behavior patterns. They are continually ecstatic about cleaning their houses and baking. When they get together they mainly trade recipes, make crafts, or coo over their clean floors and their latest triumphs in making their husbands’ lives more comfortable. They never fight, nor are they unpleasant to anyone—especially not to their husbands—and they have no opinions or interests that reach beyond their family, home and club.<br>Just a few remain on the feisty, individualistic side. But they each suddenly change to become just like the rest.<br>When this happens to the best friend of our most recent Stepford wife—who is already very suspicious about what is going on—she becomes desperate as her friend’s hand rests within the flame on the stove, but is not burned. And the friend doesn’t notice. Instead she simply mouths the same inane niceties over and over, while our main character backs away and runs out of the door.<br>By this time, however, the men’s club has planned her “transformation.” She pretends to become a sweet, sweet, sweet totally controlled wife, but she and her husband outwit them and expose the scheme.
<empty-block/>
Aside from its social agenda The Stepford Wives sends a message that is obvious and important. But it is one that is too often forgotten. In close personal relationships, conformity to another’s wishes is not desirable, be it ever so perfect, if it is mindless or purchased at the expense of freedom and the destruction of personality. This is a point that must be grasped firmly as we come to think about God’s relationship with his human creation and about what his love for us means.
<empty-block/>
God could have created a world of robots, instead of free people who love him and understand his participation in the kingdom and their work. But then there would be no conversations. There would simply be direction and conformity. That picture robs people of initiative and freedom that goes into true friendship with God—cooperative creativity. Is there subordination to God? Yes, but not forceful direction that leaves no possibility of initiative on the person’s part.
<empty-block/>
When you surrender initiative, you make prayer meaningless. It lifts your spirits, but does not influence what God is going to do. God has purposes and will accomplish these purposes, but he develops people who do those things. That is one reason it is hard to get people to pray at church and why prayer meetings are often dead. People don’t see that prayer—real, two-way conversation with God—makes any difference. If you interpret the conversation simply as God telling you what to do, you don’t see the importance of talking with and hearing God.
<empty-block/>
But prayer is an honest exchange between people who are doing things together. God and I work together, and I need to invoke his power in that activity. Joint activity is a key to understanding how conversation flows.
<empty-block/>
In such conversations we also talk about other things besides what God wants done today. We talk about what is happening, what is interesting or what is sad. Most conversation between God and humans is to help us understand things. God relates to his people in a way to help them grow and develop. We are not Stepford wives.
<empty-block/>
We must never forget that God’s speaking to us is intended to develop into an intelligent, freely cooperative relationship between mature people who love each other with the richness of genuine agape love. We must therefore make it our primary goal not just to hear the voice of God, but to be mature people in a loving relationship with him. Only in this way will we hear him rightly. This is our first general guideline.
<empty-block/>
Guideline One: Love God with All Our Being
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
When we love people, we want to please them. We don’t want this only in order to avoid trouble or to gain favor; it is our way of being with them, of sharing their life and their person
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Adults also get a sense of this larger power and larger life when they enjoy requited love. When, in the manner appropriate to the people involved, two become one, they identify with one another, expanding their selves and their world. The beloved, who both loves and is loved, does not want to order the lover about; instead the beloved desires that the lover understand what is needed so that no orders are necessary. Love is designed to be our primary way of “being with” others.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
In this union of souls—in the conscious delight and rest in one another that is the highest and most exalted relationship possible between two persons—it is not right for one person to always tell the other what to do. And so it is in our union with God, a person both loving and beloved. He does not delight in having to always explain what his will is; he enjoys it when we understand and act upon his will. Our highest calling and opportunity in life is to love him with all our being.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
God as Taskmaster<br>Far too commonly, no doubt, we think of God as did the man in the parable of the talents who regarded his lord as “a harsh man.” He was, accordingly, afraid of his master and, proudly, in his blindness, gave him back exactly what “belonged” to him (Mt 25:14-30). Such a person could not “enter into the joy of \[his\] master” because—misconceiving their relationship as he did—he could neither enter into his lord’s mind and life nor open his own life to his lord. He actually abused his lord by taking him to be interested only in getting his own back, while the lord for his part was really interested in sharing his life and goods with others.
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
The point of the parable is the conversational nature of our relationship with God. The ten-talent man took initiative; he did not wait to be told what to do with it. This one-talent man had the wrong view of God. As he spoke, saying, “Master, I knew that you were a harsh man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter seed; so I was afraid, and I went and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is yours” (vv. 24-25), he seemed to be thinking: I didn’t do anything wrong. In doing no wrong, he did the biggest wrong of all by not taking initiative, not taking part in what the Master was doing.
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
The role of taskmaster, whether a pleased one or an angry one, is a role that God accepts only when appointed to it by our own limited understanding. He thus often condescends to us because our consciousness cannot rise any higher (clouded as it is by our experiences in a fallen world with our superiors, whether they be parents, bosses, kings or those who stand over us in manipulative “love”). And the rule then, as always, is: “Let it be done for you according to your faith” (Mt 8:13). Well, no doubt it is better that we have some relation to God than no relation at all!
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
In the same way, we demean God immeasurably by casting him in the role of the cosmic boss, foreman or autocrat, whose chief joy in relation to humans is ordering them around, taking pleasure in seeing them jump at his command and painstakingly noting any failures. Instead, we are to be God’s friends (2 Chron 20:7; Jn 15:13-15) and fellow workers (1 Cor 3:9 NASB).
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
Hearing God cannot be a reliable and intelligible fact of life except when we see his speaking as one aspect of his presence with us, of his life in us. Only our communion with God provides the appropriate context for communications between us and him. And within those communications, guidance will be given in a manner suitable to our particular lives and circumstances. It will fit into our life together with God in his earthly and heavenly family. Again, this is our first preliminary insight to help us in our learning to discern God’s voice.
<empty-block/>
Guideline Two: Mere Humans Can Talk with God
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
The open secret of many “Bible-believing” churches is that only a very small percentage of their members study the Bible with even the degree of interest, intelligence or joy that they bring to bear upon their favorite newspaper or magazine. In my opinion, based on considerable experience, this is primarily because they do not know and are not taught how to understand the experience of biblical characters in terms of how they experience life.
<empty-block/>
If we are to hear God’s voice ourselves and on an individual basis, we must, above all else, observe how his word came to those people described in the Scriptures. How did they experience God’s communication? What was it like for them to hear God? We must prayerfully but boldly use our God-given imaginations as we read the stories of people who encountered God. We must ask ourselves what it would be like if we were Moses standing by the bush (Ex 3:2), little Samuel lying in his darkened room (1 Sam 3:3-7), Elisha under inspiration from the minstrel (2 Kings 3:15), Ananias receiving his vision about Paul (Acts 9:11) or Peter on his rooftop (Acts 10:10). We must pray for the faith and for the experiences that would enable us to believe that such things could happen to us. Only then will we be able to recognize, accept and dwell in them when they come. This is our second general guideline
<empty-block/>
Humble Arrogance: Who, Me, Lord?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
To the statement made earlier—that we must think of ourselves as capable of having the same kinds of experiences as did Paul, Barnabas or Elijah—many will spontaneously reply, “But who am I to put myself in the place of these great ones? Who am I even to suppose that God might guide me or speak to me, much less that my experience should be like that of a Moses or Elisha?”<br>One who has such a reaction often presumes that it honors the greatness of God. In fact, it contradicts what God has taught about himself in the Bible and in the person of Christ. His greatness is precisely what allows him to “plan his day” around me or anyone and everyone else, as he chooses.<br>Those spoken to by God in the scriptural record, such as Moses or Gideon, often tried to plead unworthiness or inadequacy. While such responses are in a sense fitting, they are also beside the point. They are irrelevant, as God makes perfectly clear in the stories concerned.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
We might even find it hard to believe it if we were told that a high government official or some other important, though merely human, dignitary had called to talk to us. We might think, on the one hand, that we are not that important and, on the other hand, that such a communication might seem to make us important. Similar thoughts may be stirred up at the suggestion of God’s talking to us. But these thoughts are simply irrelevant to his purposes in dealing with us. Furthermore, they contain tragic misconceptions that have the power to shut us off from the individualized word of God.<br>In the first place, we are that important. We were important enough for God to give his Son’s life for us and to choose to inhabit us as a living temple. Obviously, then, we are important enough for him to guide us and speak to us whenever that is appropriate.<br>In the second place, his speaking to us does not in itself make us important. Just as when he spoke to the ancient people of Israel, his speaking to us only gives us greater opportunity to be and to do good and to have greater responsibility for the care and guidance of others. But if we allow God’s conversational walk with us (or anything else) to make us think we are people of great importance, his guidance will certainly be withdrawn. For we cannot be trusted with it. Under the kingdom of the heavens, those who exalt themselves will be abased, as Jesus taught, and pride is the condition that comes right before a fall.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Guideline Three: Hearing God Doesn’t Make Us Righteous
<empty-block/>
This is an especially important point to make since the appeals “God told me” or “the Lord led me” are commonly used by the speaker to prove that “I am right,” that “you should follow me” or even that “I should get my way.” Once and for all let us say that no such claim is automatically justified.<br>This is such a common misunderstanding for seeking divine instruction that some may say, “What is the use of it then? Why should God speak to me, or I listen, if it will not give me unquestionable authority and absolutely ensure that I am on the right track?”
<empty-block/>
Never Alone
<empty-block/>
Then the LORD God said, “It is not good that the man should be alone.”<br>Genesis 2:18<br>Look, the young woman is with child and shall bear a son, and shall name him Immanuel.<br>Isaiah 7:14<br>I am with you always, to the end of the age.<br>Matthew 28:20
<empty-block/>
Then what can separate us from the love of Christ? Can affliction or hardship? Can persecution, hunger, nakedness, danger, or the sword? . . . \[I\]n spite of all, overwhelming victory is ours through him who loved us. For I am convinced that there is nothing in death or life, in the realm of spirits or superhuman powers, in the world as it is or the world as it shall be, in the forces of the universe, in heights or depths—nothing in all creation that can separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. (vv. 35, 37-39 NEB)
<empty-block/>
Even our anguish over those dear to us can be completely put to rest when we see they are living in the presence from which nothing can separate them. The complete and ultimate blessing and highest good, the summum bonum of humankind, comes to those with lives absorbed in the Way of Christ—life in the presence of God. The completely adequate word of faith in all our sorrows and all our joys is “Immanuel, God with us!”
<empty-block/>
“In your presence,” the psalmist says, “there is fullness of joy; in your right hand are pleasures forevermore” (Ps 16:11). Even in the valley of the shadow of death there is nothing to fear. Why? Because “you are with me” (Ps 23:4).
<empty-block/>
On the other hand, the fact that only God can take away our aloneness by his presence explains why the ultimate suffering and punishment is separation from the presence of God
<empty-block/>
Our contentment lies not in his presents but in the presence of the One whose presents they are.
<empty-block/>
loneliness is loose upon the landscape. It haunts the penthouse and the rectory, the executive suite and the millionaire’s mansion, as well as the barren apartment, the assembly line, the cocktail bar and the city streets. It is, as Mother Teresa of Calcutta once said, the leprosy of the modern world. A popular song of some years back deplored the fate of Eleanor Rigby and exclaimed over “All the lonely people! Where do they all come from?”6<br>There is a simple, correct answer to this question: the lonely people live apart from God. They live “without hope and without God in the world” (Eph 2:12 NIV). Their many experiences of alienation are rooted in their alienation from God.
<empty-block/>
The following words from Scripture provide some intriguing suggestions:<br>You shall be for me a priestly kingdom and a holy nation. (Ex 19:6)<br>To him who loves us and freed us from our sins by his blood, and made us to be a kingdom, priests serving his God and Father, to him be glory and dominion forever and ever. (Rev 1:5-6)<br>The basic idea here is that God calls us to a direct and fully self-conscious, personal relationship with him (as priests) in which we share responsibility with him (as kings) in the exercise of his authority. Exactly what does this involve, and how do we experience it? There are a number of forms and phases involved, as I’ve described below.
<empty-block/>
Called to a Relationship with God
<empty-block/>
Blind faith. First of all, what we may call “blind” faith is a valid, though very minimal, way of God’s being with us. Here we find ourselves believing in God and really believing that he is with us. Perhaps we believe because of past experiences, or because we have faith in the faith of others, or even because of abstract reasonings that tell us he simply must be here. But the only way that he is present in our lives is our conviction—almost a mere will that it shall be so. We have no awareness of his being here with us at all and no evidence of his action in or around us. Still we believe. Still we are faith-full.<br>Although this kind of faith is not to be despised—far from it—the human heart can never be content to treat God’s being with us merely as a matter of blind faith with nothing else to go on. Abstract reasoning from the doctrine of God’s omnipresence, mental assent to the dogma that God must be with the believer, faith in the faith of others, even remembrance of past experiences of God—none of these can be an adequate foundation for sustained spiritual growth.<br>Those who understand God’s presence only in these ways must be encouraged to believe that there is much more for them to know and receive. Otherwise they will never enter into their capacities as kings and priests, never “reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ” (Rom 5:17 NIV).
<empty-block/>
Sensing God’s presence. Perhaps the next step beyond mere faith that God must be here is an imprecise but often very powerful sense, feeling or impression of God’s presence. As is the case in our discerning the voice of God (to be discussed later), we need considerable experience in order to learn how to accurately recognize and assess the meanings of such impressions. Yet a sense of God’s presence is frequently verified through the judgment of the worshiping community, and this serves as a basis for intelligent appraisal by, and cooperation among, individuals in the group. Different people simultaneously sense that certain things are to be done—that God is here and is moving in that direction.<br>This corporate sensing is a well-known phenomenon. Experienced pastors and laypeople frequently find they have synchronized their activities in a gathering or form of service through their sense of God’s presence and intention for the particular occasion. It is something they come to expect and to rely on. And those who sense God’s presence while alone in prayer, service, meditation or study find easy communication with multitudes of others who have had similar—or even seemingly identical— experiences. They talk a common language, based on the sameness of their individual experiences.
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
The God who acts. The sense of God’s presence in Christian experience is sometimes accompanied by extraordinary events or powerful effects not easily attributable, if attributable at all, to merely natural causes. This range of effects is a third form taken by God’s presence with us, and the sense of his presence is by no means essential to it. The mark of the working of God’s Spirit with us is the incommensurability of the effects with our merely human powers. The outcome is beyond natural powers to accomplish. Such humanly unaccountable results fit into and even certify the principles and purposes of the rule of God in human history, as manifested in the works of Christ and the Scriptures generally.
**Tags:** purple
<empty-block/>
Conversational relationship
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
So far we have considered three forms or aspects of God’s presence with us: (1) when he is indeed close to us, but we are not aware of him or his effects, having only blind faith or abstract reasoning to turn us toward him; (2) when he is sensed, or there is a strong impression of his presence; and (3) when he acts in conjunction with our actions to change our surroundings in ways beyond our own powers.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Many who would agree with these three points might wish to accept what has been said so far as a complete account of the forms of God’s presence with us. But Brother Lawrence has something more in mind, and I believe he is right. To stop now would be to omit what is most important in the ongoing relationship between human beings and God. It would rob the biblical idea of the priesthood and the royalty of the believer of its substance. It would leave our interaction with God too close to the level of vague feelings, the Ouija board and even superstitious conjecture.<br>How can we be friends of God if this is all there is to it? How is the rich conceptual content and knowledge found in the Bible to be understood as something communicated to us in revelation if the three forms of presence so far discussed are the totality of human interaction with God? Why, if God is personal, would he not also talk with us?<br>So we must add to the above that God is also with us in a conversational relationship: he speaks with us individually as it is appropriate—which is only to be expected between persons who know one another, care about each other and are engaged in common enterprises.<br>It is just such a conversational manner of presence that is suited to the personal relationship with God so often spoken of in the Christian community. This turns Paul’s statement that “all who are led by the Spirit of God are children of God” (Rom 8:14) into a framework for personal development. Being “led by the Spirit of God” is neither blind, robot-style obedience nor feeling stuck interpreting vague impressions and signs.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Two Types of Guidance
<empty-block/>
Before going any further we should note that two types of guidance are commonly found in life. One is the mechanical variety that is involved in driving a car or in the remote electronic control of a model airplane or space probe. We guide something in this sense whenever we consciously cause it to proceed in a certain way we prefer. The simplest and clearest cases of this fall within the area of mechanical guidance.<br>But there is also personal guidance. Here too we wish to bring events to proceed in a certain way, but now we are dealing with people. They have a mind with which to consider matters on their own and a will concerning what is to be done. Ideally, personal guidance brings things to the desired outcome but, at the same time, allows the other person’s mind to be guided to its fullest capacity without coercing that person’s will. Thus the outcome is the work of both the individual being guided and the one who is guiding.
<empty-block/>
The individual’s uniqueness counts before God and must not be overridden. It remains your life since you have been guided only through your own understanding, deliberation and decisions.<br>For this purpose God must communicate with you, the one who is to be guided. This is the only means by which God can have an impact on you and yet still leave you with the mental and spiritual space to retain integrity as a free personality. You can live as God’s friend yet also govern your own life.
<empty-block/>
God generally deals with nonhuman or nonpersonal creation as one guides a car: by a causal influence mediated through physical reality that he has ordained in his creation. But God’s personal creatures, whether angelic or human, are also guided by his communicating his intentions and thoughts. Personal creatures are addressed by him. In Psalm 32:9 we are admonished, “Do not be like a horse or a mule, without understanding, whose temper must be curbed with bit and bridle.” We are to be led by—guided by—reasonable, intelligible communication, not by blind impulse, force or sensation alone.
<empty-block/>
Communicating with Words<br>This reasonable, intelligible personal communication may occur in one of two ways. First, God communicates through what we recognize as a voice or as words addressed to—or even through—us. The primary manner of communication from God to humankind is the Word of God, or God’s speaking. The Bible itself is God’s speaking preserved in written form. God spoke directly to Moses, to Ezekiel, to Paul and to many others. Through them he spoke indirectly to the people of Israel and to the church, and now—in the Bible—he speaks to world history.
<empty-block/>
If we look at the advice on how the meetings of the church were supposed to proceed as given in 1 Corinthians 14, we see that they assumed that numerous people in the congregation were going to have some kind of communication from God which they would be sharing with the others in the group: “When you come together, each one has a hymn, a lesson, a revelation, a tongue, or an interpretation. Let all things be done for building up” (1 Cor 14:26).<br>The ancient prophecy of Joel was fulfilled in the early church: “Your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams” (Acts 2:17; cf. Joel 2:28-32). The wish of Moses “that all the LORD’s people were prophets, and that the LORD would put his spirit on them” (Num 11:29) is substantially granted in the church of Jesus Christ when it functions as its Lord intended.
<empty-block/>
Communicating Through Shared Activity
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
The second way God’s intentions and thoughts are communicated to those who are with him involves a more active role by the recipient. It is very common among those who are most mature in his family or kingdom. Here we come to understand what God wants us to understand through immersion with him in his work. We understand what he is doing so well that we often know exactly what he is thinking and intending to do.<br>I believe that this is a great part of the condition described by the apostle Paul as having the mind of Christ: “Those who are spiritual discern all things, and they are themselves subject to no one else’s scrutiny. ‘For who has known the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him?’ But we have the mind of Christ” (1 Cor 2:15-16).
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
when we work or play closely with another and know the intentions and thoughts of the other’s mind by our awareness of what they are focused on. Someone else can work with me effectively only if they can see what I am doing without having to be told what I am thinking and what they should do to help. Model employees, for example, are by no means those who stand waiting for someone to tell them what to do. Everyone breathes more easily when the new person on the job no longer has to be told what to do at every stage.<br>Earlier we referred to the parable about the servant who obeys out of love. Jesus said that if you as the master asked your servant to prepare a meal, and your servant does what you tell him to do, you don’t thank him. If a servant does only what he is told to do, he is an unprofitable servant (Lk 17:7-10). The worthy, useful servant—much like a coworker—sees what needs to be done and simply does it. We become so close to God that we do not have to wait to hear his words. We don’t have to be asked but are engaged in free-hearted collaboration with Jesus and his friends in the kingdom.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
Mistaken Views of How God Speaks to Us<br>To conclude this chapter, let us examine three commonly accepted interpretations of how God speaks to us (including how he gives us guidance) that are surely mistaken. They are harmful to our efforts to live a life in which we hear God and receive his guidance.<br>A message a minute. According to the first view, God is either telling you what to do at every turn of the road or he is at least willing and available to tell you if you would only ask him.<br>I do not believe that either the Bible or our shared experience in the Way of Christ will substantiate this picture. There is no evidence in the life of Peter or Paul, for example, that they were constantly receiving communications from God.<br>The union Christ had with the Father was the greatest that we can conceive of in this life—if indeed we can conceive of it. Yet we have no indication that even Jesus was constantly awash with revelations as to what he should do. His union with the Father was so great that he was at all times obedient.<br>This obedience was something that rested in his mature will and understanding of his life before God, not on always being told “Now do this” and “Now do that” with regard to every detail of his life or work.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
redemptive community consists not of robots but of mature people who know how to live together and who know how to live with God. For that reason I think this model of a message a minute is mistaken and very harmful in our efforts to hear God. Extensive observations of individuals who try to live with this model, or at least profess to, show that they simply cannot do it and that any sustained effort to do so leads quickly to disaster.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
Of course, the question is not whether God could give a message every minute. Surely he could do that. He could give ten or a thousand messages a nanosecond—even more, if that would suit his purpose of bringing forth the cosmic family of God. But it does not. Sometimes we get caught up in trying
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
to glorify God by praising what he can do, and we lose sight of the practical point of what he actually does do.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
All of this must be kept in mind as we develop educational programs and worship services, and carry on the other activities of the church. In our services and in our models both of ministry and of pastors, we must remember that we are not making robots who sing, clap, pray, give and show up for meetings when they are supposed to. We are bringing forth the sons and daughters of God to live their unique lives in this world to his glory. We must do all we can to suit the means we employ to that end.
**Tags:** pink
<empty-block/>
It’s all in the Bible. I believe this second view, that it is all in the Bible, is seriously misguided and very harmful. It intends to honor the Bible, but it does so with a zeal that is not according to knowledge (Rom 10:2).<br>The Bible gives direct instructions about many situations in our lives. We do not need to make long inquiries into God’s will in order to know whether we should worship an idol, take something that is not ours, engage in illicit sex or mistreat our parents. But other questions force us to realize that many of life’s specific circumstances are not dealt with in the Bible.<br>The Bible will not tell which song you are supposed to sing next Sunday or which verse you should take as a text for a talk or a sermon. Yet it is very likely that God’s special leading is claimed for nothing more frequently than for the selection of texts and sermon topics.<br>Neither will the Bible tell you what to do with most of the details of your life. Suppose you want to know how to raise your children. It will tell you some very important things but not everything you need and want to know on that subject. Your family, your work and your community will present you with many choices and issues about which the Bible simply says nothing.<br>The principles are all there, however. I happily insist that the Bible says all that needs to be said or can be said, so far as principles are concerned. But the principles have to be applied before they can be lived out, and it is largely at the point of application that almost everything imaginable has been “proven” from the Bible. In these instances people have found applications they desperately desire by scandalously loosening principles of proof.
<empty-block/>
Our reverence for and faith in the Bible must not be allowed to blind us to the need for personal divine instruction within the principles of the Bible yet beyond the details of what it explicitly says. A distinguished minister once said on television that if we would only accept the Bible as the Word of God, all differences between Christians would be resolved. But in fact it is Biblebelieving Christians who disagree with each other most often and most heatedly.<br>Nearly every faction in Christendom claims the Bible as its basis but then goes on to disagree as to what the Bible says. An exalted view of the Bible does not free us from the responsibility of learning to talk with God and to hear him in the many ways he speaks to humankind.<br>A misguided expectation of the Bible’s ability to speak specifically to an individual or a situation leads some people to play the Bible roulette mentioned earlier. They allow the Bible to fall open where it will and then stab their finger at random on the page to see which verse it lands on. Then they read the selected verse to see what they should do. This is trying to force God to give you a message.
<empty-block/>
Whatever comes is God’s will. This third mistaken view of how God speaks is commonly adopted and has much to recommend it in terms of the peace of mind and freedom from struggle that it provides. But, in fact, it amounts to giving up any possibility of a conscious interchange between God and his children.<br>The view even shows up in some beloved hymns such as “If Thou but Suffer God to Guide Thee.” It may seem to be about exactly what we are talking about: allowing God to guide us. But when we study the hymn closely we find it counsels us to accept everything that happens as the guidance of God.<br>If you wish to know what God would have you do, it is no help at all to be told that whatever comes is his will. For you are at that moment in the position of deciding what is to come. Does it mean that whatever you do will be God’s will? I certainly hope not.<br>If Moses had accepted this view, there would have been no nation of Israel. Perhaps there would have been a nation of “Mosesites” instead. When the people made and worshiped the golden calf while Moses was on Sinai receiving God’s commandments, God said to him, “Now let me alone, so that my wrath may burn hot against them and I may consume them; and of you I will make a great nation” (Ex 32:10). Not only did Moses not accept whatever came, he actually and successfully withstood God’s own declared intent in the matter, appealing to God’s reputation before the surrounding nations and to his friendship with Abraham. “And the LORD changed his mind about the disaster that he had planned to bring on his people” (Ex 32:14).<br>Many things that happen are not the will of God, although he obviously does not act to stop them. For example, “the Lord is . . . not wanting any to perish, but all to come to repentance” (2 Pet 3:9). Nevertheless countless people do perish and fail to come to repentance.<br>God’s world is an arena in which we have an indispensable role to play. The issu...
...e is not simply what God wants, but also what we want and will. When we accept whatever comes we are not receiving guidance. The fact that something happens does not indicate that it is God’s will.
<empty-block/>
With respect to many events in our future, God’s will is that we should determine what will happen. What a child does when not told what to do is the final indicator of what and who that child is. And so it is for us and our heavenly Father
<empty-block/>
Friends Have Shared Understanding<br>Jesus calls us friends if we do what he commands (Jn 15:14). As God’s friends we always want to be asking God what he is doing and how he wants us to work with him. God’s desires are important to us. Friends are people who understand one another, and so as friends of Jesus we obey because we understand what God, our intimate Friend, is doing. Intimacy with God grows from and creates further shared understanding.
<empty-block/>
Many cannot progress in their relationship with God because they focus solely on what they think God might be telling them to do. In these cases, the friendship aspect of the relationship is missing. Things are as they should be when we don’t have to be told what to do.
<empty-block/>
Because we are God’s colaborers, our wants and desires are also important to God and God’s plan for us (1 Cor 3:9 KJV). His intent for us is that we would grow to the point we would do what we want because what we want is part of that shared understanding with God, our friend.
<empty-block/>
Saints who have been drawn into this friendship and single-focused service (slavery) become something no one has ever seen before. They become true individuals who are unique because God has shaped their hearts and their wills (Prov 3:5-6). Their desires match up with God’s desires, and they are empowered to do what they and God want. (On the other hand, sinners are boringly predictable because there is nothing unique in what they live for. People who are enslaved to their desires are all similar.)
<empty-block/>
Shared Work for Good<br>God gives us as his colaborers the power of creativity, and we delight in our creativity. That shared understanding and creative activity is spelled out in Genesis 1:26, where we are given responsibilities so that we share in carrying out creative responsibilities with him: “Let us make humankind in our image, according to our likeness.” What does that mean? Look at the next few words: “and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the wild animals of the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.” God is trying to create the greatest possible good and gives us the responsibility to exercise dominion to do good, using the powers that we have to do good.
<empty-block/>
That conversational relationship we carry on with God creates our unique life. And that is how God wants things to be.
<empty-block/>
Our Communicating Cosmos
<empty-block/>
The Limits of Signs
<empty-block/>
It is important, however, to recognize that there is a limit to how much our faith can grow by contemplating such stories—no matter how well attested they may be, no matter how reliable the minds and characters of the people involved. And this limit is not neglected in the teachings of the Bible itself.<br>Jesus tells of father Abraham’s words to the rich man in hell, that if the rich man’s brothers still on earth “do not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be convinced even if someone rises from the dead” (Lk 16:31). This fits in with Jesus’ refusal to do religious stunts, or signs, for those who demanded them (Mt 12:39-40; Mk 8:11-12; Lk 23:8-9; Jn 2:18; 6:30). I believe he refused because he knew that such deeds, no matter how wondrous, would be fruitless against the false ideas and mindsets of the observers. I cannot imagine that he would have withheld signs if they truly could have helped people to have genuine faith in him.<br>The signs, however, could not help. Our preexisting ideas and assumptions are what actually determine what we can see, hear or otherwise observe. These general ideas—which so often we hold because they express how we want things to be—determine what stories can mean to us. Our beliefs and opinions cannot, therefore, be changed by stories and miraculous events alone, since they prevent a correct perception of those very stories and events.
<empty-block/>
Many people’s honest response to the idea that God desires to interact with people in a conversational relationship will be:<br>1. that God would not communicate with run-of-the-mill human beings by surrounding them with his presence and speaking to them<br>2. that he does not communicate with them in that way<br>3. that he cannot do so<br>4. that God should not communicate with individuals (motivated by the need to control the divine presence and word for what they sincerely regard as proper purposes)<br>I offer the following replies to these four negative responses.
<empty-block/>
Truth 1: God Would
<empty-block/>
When considering whether God would be with ordinary human beings in a conversational relationship, we must remember not to think of him in the likeness of any human dignitaries we know. The rich, the famous and the great among humanity are still severely limited in their powers of communication by the fact that they are merely human. They are narrowly limited in their ability to interact personally with others. So it is possible for them to be in intimate contact only with a small number of other people—even with all the wonders of modern communications technology. Their span of consciousness, their capacity to pay attention and the scope of their willpower permit nothing more.<br>Beyond such factual limitations, human greatness is often taken to mean, and essentially to require, having nothing to do with just ordinary people. This sort of greatness is seen as involving a certain exclusiveness, insularity or snobbishness. If we cannot clear our minds of such associations with greatness, we won’t be able to imagine that the great God would talk to us. We will think of him as a dignitary who is too busy, too conscious of his status or too high up to communicate with us.<br>How hard it is for us to come to an adequate conception of the lowliness of God—of how his greatness is precisely what makes him able, available and ready to hear and speak personally with his creatures!
<empty-block/>
This lowliness was at the very center of Jesus’ teaching about God. In his actions and words Jesus made clear how totally accessible God is to the weak, to the downtrodden and castaway, to little children. “Let the children come to me, and do not stop them; for it is to such as these that the kingdom of heaven belongs” (Mt 19:14). Our Lord’s phrase “such as these” includes many characteristics of children, but here I want to stress the element of unimportance. The humanly unimportant ones are important to God. God being who he is, and now revealed in the person of Jesus Christ, we should be surprised if he does not speak to us.
<empty-block/>
Truth 2: God Does
<empty-block/>
What about those who believe that God just simply does not speak to them? Here we must consider, I believe, two separate lines along which the cause of their difficulty may be found.<br>Are we “in tune”? First of all, the fact that we do not hear God does not mean that God is not speaking to us. Even at our human level it is common for us not to hear those who speak to us. It has probably happened to most of us this very day. Someone spoke to us, but we did not know it, did not hear it. Moreover, we know that messages from radio and television programs are passing through our bodies and brains at all hours of the day: messages that an appropriately tuned receiver could pluck from the air we breathe.<br>What an apt picture this is of human beings in relation to God: we are showered with messages that simply go right through or past us. We are not attuned to God’s voice. We have not been taught how to hear it sounding out in nature—for as we read in Psalm 19, “The heavens announce the glory of God”—or in a special communication directed by God to the individual.<br>Some of Jesus’ deepest teachings are about hearing. He taught in parables so that those who did not really want to hear the truth could avoid it. He realized that not everyone has ears for the straightforward purpose of hearing but that some use their ears to sift out only what they want to hear, leaving the rest aside. One of his most repeated sayings was, “If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear.” But he also urged his hearers to make a great effort to hear, assuring them that what they received would be proportional to their desire and effort (Mk 4:23-24).
<empty-block/>
Are we ready vessels? This brings us to the second source of difficulty for those who say, “God just doesn’t speak to me.” Here a bit of honest soul-searching may be required. Possibly they are being spoken to and do not hear. It may also be that they could make no good use of a word from God because of how they are living.<br>Do they stand ready to obey and change if God directs that? Do they want to know if they are on a wrong path? In general it is a good thing for God to speak to us, but in individual cases there may be reasons it would be best for God to speak very little or even not at all. If it is true that God does not speak to me, then I must inquire whether I am such a case.<br>The question must be asked, To what use would I try to put a word from God? God is not a snob, and he is not far away: “See, the LORD’s hand is not too short to save, nor his ear too dull to hear” (Is 59:1). But when he speaks, it is to accomplish his good purposes in our lives and through his creation.<br>God’s guidance is not a gimmick that we can keep on tap for our gain. It is not there to enable us to beat our competitors. We cannot invoke it to help us win bets on football matches or horse races or to prove that something is theologically correct. While it is available to every person who walks with God, it is not at our disposal as we see fit without regard to the purposes of God’s government. Nor should it be, for that would be very dangerous.
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
We pray, “Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” This preamble to the Lord’s Prayer beautifully expresses the purpose of all God’s activities in us: “Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done.” Hearing God is a reliable, day-to-day reality for people with good sense; it is for those who are devoted to the glory of God and the advancement of his kingdom. It is for the disciple of Jesus Christ who has no higher preference than to be like him.
**Tags:** blue
<empty-block/>
Are we ready to be in business with God? If you find yourself in a position where you can honestly say, “God has never spoken to me,” then you might ask yourself, Why should God speak to me? What am I doing in life that would make speaking to me a reasonable thing for him to do? Are we in business together in life? Or am I in business just for myself, trying to “use a little God” to advance my projects?<br>When our lives are devoted to the will of God, he has reason to speak to us. If our lives are not devoted to his purposes, he may still speak to us and even use us for his purposes if we are strategically placed. After all, we are his creatures, no matter how misguided or rebellious. But for a willing walk in conscious, loving cooperation with God, we must come to grips with the issue What are we living for? We must face it clearly.<br>It may be that I have never come to the place where I can truly say, “I am living for one thing and one thing only—to be like Christ, to do his work and live among his people and serve them and him in this world. My life is to bless others in the name of God.” If we have not come to that place, then the question that normally arises as, How do we hear the word of God? is replaced for us by the prior question, What would we do if we heard the word of God?
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Perhaps we do not hear the voice because we do not expect to hear it. Then again, perhaps we do not expect it because we know that we fully intend to run our lives on our own and have never seriously considered anything else. The voice of God would therefore be an unwelcome intrusion into our plans. By contrast, we expect great spiritual leaders to hear that voice just because we see their lives wholly given up to doing what God wants.
**Tags:** green
<empty-block/>
Truth 3: God Certainly Can <br>Many fear that the physical universe, being what it is, makes communication with God impossible. It puts him too far away. Even some who understand both the lowliness of God’s greatness and the greatness of God’s lowliness and who really live to do the will of God are still troubled by the thought that brutal nature interposes itself as a barrier between us and him.
<empty-block/>
we may seem to have imposed on us a picture of reality in which humanity is encapsulated within a material world. God, if he really exists, is pictured as being wholly beyond that material world, which for its part, seems to run without God. Given such a view of things, one of the most difficult issues we face in trying to think about hearing God concerns the “how” of it all.
<empty-block/>
For example, if you want to talk to someone in another country, you will have to put into action a chain of events in the physical substance, the inorganic matter, between here and there. You will perhaps begin by entering a number on your telephone. This will cause electrical impulses to propagate themselves by various means across the intervening space. A physical apparatus located at the other end will be sensitive to those impulses and will convert them into a form that your faraway friend can hear or see and understand.<br>The point is that to communicate across such a distance, we must go through an intervening physical reality. Even if I wish to speak directly to you as you stand here with me, I must do the same thing. I make some sort of noise with my vocal cords that strikes your eardrum, which somehow—in a way no one fully understands—causes you to think of specific things or events. I bring about your thinking, and that is what my communication with you comprises.<br>Given such a picture of communication, the questions we must now face are as clear as they are compelling: Is this the only way in which God can communicate with us? Does God always have to go through physical substance? Does the entire realm of organic and inorganic matter stand between us and God? Where is God in relation to that realm? How does God relate to us if he is far off from us?
<empty-block/>
Not all of reality involves space. For many, these will be the most difficult questions in this chapter, perhaps even in the whole book. So I shall hasten to remind you that God does not have to go through physical intermediaries of any sort to reach us—though on some occasions he obviously chooses to do so. The material world in which we are placed by God permits him to be nearer to us even than our own eyes, ears and brain are near. It is “in him” that we “live, and move, and have our being” (Acts 17:28).<br>Conversational life with God—or prayer—is not hindered by space and distance. When you speak to God, it is like speaking to someone next to you. Spirit is unbodily personal power. Our conversation is not limited by space, time or matter. God is looking for those who will worship him in spirit and in truth. You don’t need a holy place, as the woman at the well learned when she asked, “Where is the holy place—on this mountain or in Jerusalem?” (Jn 4:19, paraphrase). God is not looking for a holy place. Places are holy because God is there.
<empty-block/>
We can be comfortable, then, with the view that we live in the kind of material universe in which hearing directly from God is possible. This view is expressed in the Bible—in John 1, Hebrews 1 and so on. Since it is the nature of mind, always and everywhere, to guide, is it not therefore reasonable to expect guidance and communication from God?
<empty-block/>
Truth 4: And God Should!
<empty-block/>
Sheepdogs or shepherds? In our examples and training for Christian leadership, we too often emphasize getting others merely to do as they are told. In this way the church largely conforms to the leadership structures of the world. Indeed, leadership is normally an empty euphemism when applied to our standard communal efforts, whether in a church or outside it.<br>To manipulate, drive or manage people is not the same thing as to lead them.<br>To manipulate, drive or manage people is not the same thing as to lead them. The sheepdog forcibly maneuvers the sheep, whereas the biblical shepherd simply calls as he calmly walks ahead of the sheep. This distinction between the sheepdog and the shepherd is profoundly significant for how leaders of Christ’s people think of their work. We must ask ourselves frequently which role we are fulfilling and constantly return ourselves, if necessary, to the practice of the shepherd.
<empty-block/>
When we lead as shepherds, our confidence is in only one thing: the word of the Great Shepherd, coming through us or, otherwise, to his sheep. We know that they know his voice and will not follow another (Jn 10:1-16). We do not want them to follow another, even if we ourselves are that “other.” Only this supreme confidence frees us to be true ministers of Christ. We are then sure that “every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted” (Mt 15:13). And we have heard the Master say, “Everything that the Father gives me will come to me, and anyone who comes to me I will never drive away” (Jn 6:37).
<empty-block/>
Leadership: Cultic or Christlike? Spokespeople for the Christian community as well as the general public are frequently heard to lament the way in which cults turn their adherents into mindless robots. In our highly fragmented society that is dominated by gadgetry and technology, lonely and alienated people are ready prey for any person who comes along and speaks with confidence about life and death—especially when that person has some degree of glamour and professes to speak for God.<br>There are now more than two and a half thousand distinct cults active in the United States alone, most based on the premise that God speaks to one or several central people in the group in a way that he does not speak to the ordinary members. These members are taught not to trust their own minds or their own communications with God except within the context of the group, with all its pressures toward conformity to the word from on high. Frequently, adherents are taught to accept pronouncements that are self-contradictory and fly in the face of all common sense if the leader says they must.<br>These are common factors among many cults, even the more extreme groups that form around personalities such as Jim Jones and Charles Manson. But the more “mainline” religious groups, if they would be honest, might find that their own models of leadership actually prepare the way for cult phenomena because they too use these methods to some extent. I must ask myself, as a Christian minister, to what extent I, in order to secure enough conformity and support to maintain and enlarge my plans, might be prepared to have people put away their minds and their own individual experiences of guidance and communication with their Lord.
<empty-block/>
</content>
</page>